Generation of a high yield vaccine backbone for influenza B virus in embryonated chicken eggs | npj Vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature npj vaccines articles article Generation of a high yield vaccine backbone for influenza B virus in embryonated chicken eggs Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 10 February 2023 Generation of a high yield vaccine backbone for influenza B virus in embryonated chicken eggs Sadaf Aslam1,2, Madhusudan Rajendran1, Divya Kriti ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9357-55883, Andrew Kurland1,2, Jeffrey Johnson1,2, Harm van Bakel ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1376-69163, Florian Krammer ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4121-776X1,4, Adolfo García-Sastre ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6551-18271,2,4,5,6 & …Juan Ayllon ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7556-81061,2,7 Show authors npj Vaccines volume 8, Article number: 12 (2023) Cite this article 2931 Accesses 3 Citations 2 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusVaccines AbstractInfluenza B virus (IBV) strains are one of the components of seasonal influenza vaccines in both trivalent and quadrivalent formulations. The vast majority of these vaccines are produced in embryonated chickens’ eggs. While optimized backbones for vaccine production in eggs exist and are in use for influenza A viruses, no such backbones exist for IBVs, resulting in unpredictable production yields. To generate an optimal vaccine seed virus backbone, we have compiled a panel of 71 IBV strains from 1940 to present day, representing the known temporal and genetic variability of IBV circulating in humans. This panel contains strains from the B/Victoria/2/87-like lineage, B/Yamagata/16/88-like lineage and the ancestral lineage that preceded their split to provide a diverse set that would help to identify a suitable backbone which can be used in combination with hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins from any IBV strain to be incorporated into the seasonal vaccine. We have characterized and ranked the growth profiles of the 71 IBV strains and the best performing strains were used for co-infection of eggs, followed by serial passaging to select for high-growth reassortant viruses. After serial passaging, we selected 10 clonal isolates based on their growth profiles assessed by hemagglutination and plaque-forming units. We then generated reverse genetics systems for the three clones that performed best in growth curves. The selected backbones were then used to generate different reassortant viruses with HA/NA combinations from high and low titer yielding wild type IBV. When the growth profiles of the recombinant reassortant viruses were tested, the low titer yielding HA/NA viruses with the selected backbones yielded higher titers similar to those from high titer yielding HA/NA combinations. The use of these IBV backbones with improved replication in eggs might increase yields for the influenza B virus components of seasonal influenza virus vaccines. Similar content being viewed by others Enhanced isolation of influenza viruses in qualified cells improves the probability of well-matched vaccines Article Open access 09 December 2021 Mass vaccination with reassortment-impaired live H9N2 avian influenza vaccine Article Open access 03 August 2024 Single dose of multi-clade virus-like particle vaccine protects chickens against clade 2.3.2.1 and clade 2.3.4.4 highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses Article Open access 02 July 2021 IntroductionAccording to World Health Organization (WHO) the annual influenza epidemic results in about 1 billion infections, 3–5 million cases of severe illness and about 290,000-650,000 deaths1. Out of those, a significant number are due to influenza B virus (IBV) infections. As examples of the burden caused by these viruses, according to weekly influenza reports by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), roughly half of the deaths in the US during the 2019-2020 season, including most of the pediatric death reports, were due to IBVs2.IBVs belong to the Orthomyxoviridae family and are segmented, single stranded, negative sense RNA viruses3. IBVs were first isolated in 1940 and primarily infect humans although they have been found in seals and pigs4,5. IBVs are known to cause epidemics, but its restriction to humans has reduced the chances of a IBV pandemic, since there are no animal reservoirs where antigenically unrelated IBV can reassort. In the 1980ies, two antigenically distinct lineages of IBVs based on the sequences of the hemagglutinin (HA) segment of the virus were identified and in 2002 co-circulation of the two different lineages was detected. The two lineages are denoted as B/Yamagata/16/88-like (Y) and B/Victoria/2/87-like (V) viruses, or simply Victoria- and Yamagata-like, based on their prototype ancestral strains6.In the last 20 years, there has been some progress in the development of next generation seasonal influenza vaccines. There are several manufacturing platforms that are currently being used, such as cell-based, protein-based, and egg-based. For influenza A virus, cell-based and egg-based seasonal vaccines utilize the internal segments of a high yield laboratory strain as backbone, in combination with HA and NA of the recommended strain for the season. Historically, re-assorted influenza virus vaccine seeds were made by co-infection of the selected strain with the laboratory strain, in the presence of antibodies against the HA and NA of the laboratory strains, to generate re-assorted viruses that had the internal segments of the laboratory strains conferring high-growth properties and the HA and NA of the desired vaccine strain7. However, due to the advancement in reverse genetic techniques, influenza virus vaccine seeds can now be generated by transfecting plasmids that contain internal segments of the high growth laboratory strains, and plasmids that express HA and NA of the desired circulating strains. This allows for faster generation of reassortant viruses for vaccine production8,9,10. However, this technology is not broadly used across all manufacturers. Many companies still use the co-infection of laboratory and strain with desired glycoproteins in the presence of antibodies to generate reassortants.The current influenza manufacturing process takes approximately 7 months from strain selection to availability of enough vaccine doses11,12. Production-wise, it is of critical importance to have a high titer yielding backbone strain to reach the required production goals. The preferred backbone for influenza A virus vaccines is A/PR/8/347, while there is no specific high titer yielding backbone donor strain for IBV. Historically, various strains have been used as the high titer yielding backbone strains for IBV, such as, B/Lee/40, and many times the wild type strain has been used without reassortment to generate the vaccine seed. There have been several attempts made to generate a high titer yielding seed virus for IBV, through reassortments, and by introducing several growth enhancing mutations into the six internal segments of a selected strain13. However, this method generated two separate backbones for the two main lineages of IBVs currently circulating, instead of one single backbone that can be used for all IBVs13.In this study, our main goal was to generate a backbone that can be used to generate recombinant viruses that yield high titers for any IBV strain, regardless of the lineage of the wild type strain, in the most used manufacturing substrate for influenza vaccines, embryonated chicken eggs. We achieved this by testing several strains and performing competitive reassortment assays to select the desired backbone. Finally, reverse genetics was used to establish various recombinant viruses to test whether the selected internal virus gene backbone for IBV yielded high growth vaccine viruses when reassorted with the HA and NA genes of both high and low titer yielding wild type IBV strains.ResultsStandard conditions and testing a panel of influenza B virus strainsFirst, we set out to determine the best possible growth conditions for IBV strains in embryonated chicken eggs, so we could use them later for the selection of the optimized backbones. We started testing for optimal temperature, and time post infection, using three representative model strains of B/Phuket/3073/2013 (B/Yamagata/16/88-like), B/Malaysia/2506/2004 (B/Victoria/2/87-like), and B/Hong Kong/8/73 (ancestral). We tested two different temperatures and several time points post-infection. The three strains grew to the highest infectious titers and hemagglutination (HA) titers at 33 °C and 48 h post-infection (Fig. 1a), independently of their lineage. Thus, from there onward we continued using B/Malaysia/2506/2004 MA (mouse adapted) as an internal control and as a reference strain. Then we determined starting infectious dosage and egg age by testing three different inocula (250, 500 and 1000 PFU (plaque forming unit)) and two different egg ages (8 and 10 days old) at 33 °C and 48 h post infection. The difference in titer was not statistically significant but there was a trend that B/Malaysia/2506/2004 MA had the highest HA and plaque titers in 10-day old eggs, with the 250 PFU inoculum (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1: Optimal growth conditions for growing IBV in eggs.a Embryonated chicken eggs were injected with three representative strains to test for optimal temperature and optimal time post infection for growing IBV in triplicates and titers were determined by HA and plaque assays. Viruses were harvested 12, 24, 48 and 72 h post infection and eggs were incubated at 33 or 37 °C. b One representative strain (B/Malaysia/2506/2004 MA) was used to determine optimal egg age and inoculum for growing IBV in duplicates, and titers were determined by HA and plaque assay. 8 and 10 day old embryonated chicken eggs were used, and three different inoculums were tested. Dotted lines represent reference to the different titers. Two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was performed to compare mean differences between different inoculums and egg ages. Statistical significance was considered when p ≤ 0.05 and marked on the graph.Full size imageWe then fixed the growth conditions as 33°C, 48 h post infection, 10 day old eggs, and 250 PFU inoculum, and proceeded to use them to assess the peak growth titers of 71 IBV strains (Fig. 2), which has been described before14. The phylogenetic analysis of the HA and nucleoprotein (NP) segments (Fig. 3a, b) of all the viruses used in this collection shows the broad distribution and temporal diversity of this panel of IBV strains.Fig. 2: Peak titers for 71 different IBV strains in embryonated chicken eggs.A panel of IBV strains were tested in optimal conditions (10 day old embryonated chicken eggs, 33 °C, 48 h time post infection, and 250 PFU inoculum) in triplicates. The panel contained strains from ancestral linage, B/Victoria-like, B/Yamagata-like, and reassortant viruses. HA and plaque assay titers are shown (black and gray bars respectively), the strains are ranked from highest to lowest plaque titers within each lineage type. Plaque titers for all the strains ranged from 105 to 109 PFU/mL (Plaque forming unit (PFU)) (n = 3, error bars represent standard deviation). (Strains highlighted in red and marked with stars indicate the low and high titer yielding strains later tested in combination with optimal backbones).Full size imageFig. 3: Phylogenetic analysis of nucleoprotein and hemagglutinin segments from the 71 IBV strains and schematic description of co-infection experiment.Nucleotide sequences for a HA (scale bar: 0.02) and (b) NP (scale bar: 0.007) were aligned using Clustal Omega and trees were visualized using Figtree. Highlighted in red are the 15 strains used for coinfection. (Scale bar indicates the percentage of change in nucleotide). c 15 highest growing IBV strains based on plaque titers were mixed at a constant concentration of 40 PFU/strain and 200 μl of the mixture was injected into three different eggs (labeled: Mix 1, Mix 2, and Mix 3). The virus was serial passaged ten times in eggs (10-day old eggs). In between passages, the virus was diluted to 10-5 and 200 μl was injected into the eggs. Virus titer was monitored by HA and plaque assay during the passages.Full size imageCo-infection and reassortant generationNext, we selected 15 strains that had high infectious titers in eggs, from the panel of 71 strains. Specifically, we selected five strains with the highest titers from each group B/Yamagata/16/88-like, B/Victoria/2/87-like, and ancestral for co-infection. For B/Florida/4/2006, we used the MA version since the reverse genetics system was already established and available. The selected strains are highlighted in red in the two phylogenetic trees shown in Fig. 3a, b. We pooled all the strains at a constant titer of 40 PFU/strain (total volume: 200 µl/egg) and infected three 10-day old eggs labeled Mix 1, Mix 2, and Mix 3, respectively. These samples were serially passaged in eggs for 10 passages. Between each passage, collected allantoic fluid was diluted to 10−5 (by volume) and 200 µl were injected into fresh eggs (Fig. 3c). We monitored hemagglutination and plaque titers during the passages. Throughout the passages viral titers were relatively high, ranging between 107 to 108 PFU/mL. To assess the genetic diversity of the passaged mixtures, after passage 10, RNA-seq was done on all three final samples, indicating polyclonal populations in all of them. Polyclonal populations were defined by the detection of multiple single nucleotide variants.Clonal isolatesIn order to filter the large genetic diversity and polyclonal populations assessed after the last passage, we picked multiple plaques from each of the three samples (a total of 19 plaques) and amplified them in eggs. All 19 clones were deep sequenced and analyzed. Since some of the plaque purified viruses still had a mixed population for some segments, we repeated the process by selecting 5 clones per initial plaque and amplified them in eggs for a total of 95 clonal isolates. After analyzing the data, we found 31 clonal isolates that did not have multiple single nucleotide variants. The identities of each segment were identified by aligning the consensus sequences from RNA-seq with the consensus sequences of each of the fifteen strains used for co-infection. We labeled each segment for the strain that aligned closest to the original sequence (Table 1 and supplementary table 3). We selected top 10 clonal isolates out of the 31 clonal isolates based on their hemagglutinin and plaque titers (a combination of PFU/HAU ratio and PFU titers) (Supplementary table 1). We performed growth kinetics in eggs with the selected 10 clonal isolates to determine the top three clonal isolates that grew to high titers (Fig. 4a). The three clonal isolates selected for establishing reverse genetics were M1P21, M3P84 and M3P67.Table 1 Genetic characteristics of the top ten clonal isolates.Full size tableFig. 4: Growth kinetics of clonal isolates and list of recombinant viruses generated.a Growth kinetics of 10 clonal isolates was performed in eggs in triplicates and plaque titers were measured at 24, 48, and 72 h post infection in 10 day old embryonated chicken eggs. b Two of the highest growing clonal isolates were selected to generate reassortant viruses (M1P21 and M3P67) with HA/NA of low and high titer yielding viruses. (n = 3, error bars represent standard deviation). Two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was performed to compare mean differences between different clonal isolates at different time points. Statistical significance was considered when p ≤ 0.05 (∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001); NS not significant and marked on the graph.Full size imageReassortant virusesWe then generated complete reverse genetics systems for all three selected high growth viruses. We cloned all 8 segments of M1P21, M3P84 and M3P67 into pDZ vectors15 (Fig. 4b). These 8 plasmids were transfected into 293 T cells and recombinant viruses were generated as described before16. Next, we selected low titer yielding strains from B/Yamagata/16/88-like, B/Victoria/2/87-like and ancestral groups based on the peak titers from the initial 71 IBV strain panel (Fig. 2, marked with a star and highlighted in red) and cloned their HA and NA segments into pDZ vectors. We used B/Hong Kong/5/72 (ancestral), B/Hawaii/10/2001 (B/Victoria/2/87-like) and B/Utah/9/2014 (B/Yamagata/16/88-like) as the low titer yielding viruses.We also tested HAs and NAs of high titer yielding viruses to see if we can maintain or increase their titer even further with our backbone constructs. We used B/Great Lakes/1739/54 (ancestral), B/Bangladesh/5278/2006 (B/Victoria/2/87-like) and B/Texas/06/2011 (B/Yamagata/16/88-like) as the high titer yielding viruses (Fig. 2, marked with a star and highlighted in red). We generated recombinant M1P21 and M3P67 viruses and rescued them with different combinations of HA and NA segments from low and high titer yielding strains. We did not test the M3P84 backbone because this virus did not rescue very efficiently with the different combinations. However, we were able to rescue different combinations of viruses with M1P21 and M3P67 backbones in the first attempt.Growth kinetics using recombinant virusesTo validate if the high titer yielding backbone indeed increases the titer of reassortants, we performed growth kinetics using the 14 recombinant viruses that we generated (Figs. 5a, b). We conclude that the titers for recombinant viruses with HA/NA derived from high titer yielding strains remained high, while the recombinant viruses with HA/NA from low titer yielding strains were higher than those of the corresponding wild type strains. A comparison of the peak titers of the recombinant viruses with the wild type strains at 48 h post infection is depicted in Figs. 5c, d. There was a 100-fold increase (10^6 to 10^8 PFU/mL or higher) in plaque titers when the HA/NA of low titer yielding viruses was reasserted with the backbone of the high growth selected viruses (Fig. 5d). And the titers for recombinant viruses with HA/NA derived from high titer yielding strains were still high and similar to the original titers (Fig. 5c). We observed statistical significance for difference in titers for some of the reassortant viruses versus WT strains. This indicates that these IBV backbones are efficient at generating reassortant viruses and can increase the titer for low titer yielding viruses regardless of the lineage of the virus.Fig. 5: Growth kinetics and peak titers of recombinant viruses with different combination of HA/NAs.Growth kinetics of recombinant viruses with HA/NA of low and high titer yielding viruses with a M1P21 and (b) M3P67 backbones in eggs were performed in triplicates and plaque titers were measured at 24, 48 and 72 h post infection in 10 day old embryonated chicken eggs. Peak titers at 48 h were compared between (c) high titer yielding WT strains and recombinant viruses with high titer yielding HA/NA with the two backbones and (d) low titer yielding WT strains and recombinant viruses with low titer yielding HA/NA. (n = 3, error bars represent standard deviation) One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was performed to compare mean differences between recombinant viruses and the respective WT strains. Statistical significance was considered when p ≤ 0.05 (∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001); NS not significant and marked on the graph.Full size imageHA levels of high-growth reassortantsFinally, we wanted to determine the HA protein levels expressed and incorporated by the recombinant high growth viruses, as HA amount is the main factor used for standardizing vaccine batches. For this we used rM3P67/GL/HN, rM3P67/HI/HN, rM3P67 and the corresponding wild type strains. As a control for HA in rM3P67 we used B/Florida/4/2006 MA WT virus. First, we purified the recombinant viruses and wild type viruses using 30% sucrose cushion. We treated 20 µg of total protein with PNGase F and ran 10 µg of the treated sample on a 12% reducing denaturing sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and stained with Coomassie blue (Fig. 6a). This showed that the virus preparations were pure, as indicated by the absence of smear, and the overall total protein pattern for reassortant and WT strains was same regardless of treatment. Next, we looked at HA protein only. We ran equal amounts of total protein (20 ng) for all the viruses in 10% SDS-PAGE gel and immunoblotted by probing with anti-HA mAb KL-BHA-4C1017. We compared HA2 levels across all the viruses and saw that the HA2 levels were similar across the recombinant and wild type viruses (Fig. 6b). A commercial polyclonal antibody against NP was used as a loading control and NP levels were similar across the viruses as well. Lastly, we quantified total protein concentration using Bradford assay (Supplementary table 2) for mass spectrometry based quantification of HA peptide. We digested 50 µg (total protein) of each concentrated virus with trypsin and spiked it with two different heavy peptides (individually). Each of the sample was analyzed on Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system. Percent of HA content in total protein was calculated by averaging the amount of HA obtained from the two peptides (Fig. 6c). Precursor chromatograms for each peptide and virus replicate showing precursor intensity and retention time (Supplementary fig. 1, 2) were used to calculate HA concentration. We observed slightly higher amount of HA concentration in recombinant reassortant viruses in comparison to the wild type strains from which the HA derives, which in combination to the high titers that can be obtained from them lead to a high yield production system for otherwise difficult to grow IBV vaccine strains.Fig. 6: Characterization of HA content in the reassortant and WT viruses.Wild type and recombinant viruses were grown in 10 days old embryonated eggs and concentrated using 30% sucrose cushion. a 20 µg (total protein) of purified virus was treated with PNGase F. 10 µg (total protein) was loaded in 12% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with coomassie. Treated and untreated samples were run to see the shift in mobility. b 20 ng (total protein) of purified virus was denatured by heating and run on a 10% reducing denaturing SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with antibody against HA (KL-BHA-4C10) for HA2 and NP (polyclonal commercial) served as a loading control. (MW = molecular weight, kDa = kilodalton). c Boxplot showing percent of HA content in total protein. Samples were digested with trypsin and spiked with heavy HA peptide (QLPNLLR or SKPYYTGEHAK) (n = 3, independent experiments). The amount of HA using each peptide is averaged to calculate HA content. The box plots are in the Tukey style, central line indicates median, the hinges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th quartiles of data. The whiskers indicate the largest/smallest values no further than 1.5 * IQR from the closest hinge (IQR inter-quartile range). Viruses used in all the experiments were the following B/Great Lakes/1739/54, B/Hawaii/10/2001, B/Florida/4/2006 MA (control), rM3P67 (control), rM3P67/GL/HN, rM3P67/HI/HN.Full size imageDiscussionThe ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted the critical relevance of vaccines in combating currently circulating and newly emerging infectious diseases. The outstanding speed at which these vaccines have been mass-produced has also shown how relevant it is, not only to develop protective immunization strategies, but also the means by which they can be deployed in the most efficient manner.Currently available influenza vaccines are suboptimal and need to be reassessed and reformulated every year, leading to a lengthy production time of 7 months, assuming the process goes smoothly, and vaccine strains are generated efficiently. Unfortunately, this is not always the case, as the yields obtained may vary greatly among different strains. While this can be circumvented for IAV by using well characterized, optimized backbones18,19, no such systems are currently in use for IBV and too often wild type IBV strains have to be used directly as vaccine seeds.In this study, we generated two IBV vaccine backbones that can be used in combination with HA/NA from the two IBV lineages, leading to high titers for vaccine production in eggs. We generated these backbones by reassorting and performing competitive reassortment experiments among 15 high growing IBV strains, and screening 91 clonal isolates for high growth after two rounds of plaque purification. Out of the 91 clonal isolates we selected 3 clonal high growth isolates to establish reverse genetic systems. We generated recombinant reassortant viruses with HA/NA derived from representative low and high titer yielding IBV strains from B/Yamagata/16/88-like lineage, B/Victoria/2/87-like lineage and ancestral lineage. These reassortants maintained the high titer in eggs of the viruses that were already growing to high titers and also increased the titers of low titer yielding strains by 100-fold (10^6 to 10^8 PFU/mL or higher). Furthermore, we analyzed the HA content of the different viral preparations and found that the amount per viral particle in our recombinant optimized backbones is comparable to that on the wild type virions.During sequence alignment and analysis, we identified mutations (Table 1 and supplementary table 3) that were present in various segments. Some of the amino acid changes were in the surface glycoprotein, NA. We also identified a mutation (P42S) common for B/Victoria/2/87-like20 viruses in one of the NAs that belongs to B/Yamagata/16/88-like virus in our alignment. We also found interesting amino acid changes in some of the internal segments. In clonal isolate M3P6 2, we identified an amino acid change at position 70 in NS1 protein. The mutation is K70E and it has been known as a site for SUMOylation in NS1 of IAV21. We suggest that this mutation plays a similar role in IBV, but further experiments would need to be performed to confirm this. We have also identified various mutations in PB1, PB2, PA and NP proteins and we would like to study them in detail to identify which mutations play a role in increasing the titer. Specifically, of the final two selected backbones, M1P21 has a K741R mutation in PB1, and both M1P21 and M3P67 share a K489E mutation in PA. It will be interesting to find out whether these mutations contribute to their high-growth properties and if they prevent K modification by ubiquitination, ISGylation and/or SUMOylation. We observed few changes in the non-coding regions. The relevance of the mutation (deletion of A at nucleotide 45) in NS of B/Malaysia/04 is not likely to significantly impact viral fitness, as it appears in both high and not-high growing clones. Other mutations such as addition of AA at nucleotide 47-48 in NP of B/Michigan/71 from clone M2P4 3 and nucleotide changes at position 10 in segments PB1 (B/Michigan/71 (A- > G)) and PB2 (B/Yamagata/88 (G- > A)) could be playing a role in polymerase binding, according to previously reported data22 and therefore may be an interesting subject for future studies.Based on our findings, we suggest that these backbones could be used as vaccine backbones for IBV strains to be included in seasonal influenza virus vaccines. Although we did observe high-growth properties for all six representative HA/NA combinations for both backbones, the identification of two independent backbones might help in case one of the backbones is not optimal for a specific HA/NA combination.Our work has been focused on the embryonated egg vaccine production and as such has been optimized for this platform. Embryonated eggs are a fast, reliable and cost-effective system that greatly expands vaccine production capabilities to a broader range of countries23,24 and so remain a critical technology for global influenza vaccination. It may not be only relevant for global influenza vaccination but any strategies that involve eggs for vaccine production, for example, some vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 are being produced in eggs24. Additionally, for other platforms competitive reassortment strategy could be used to select IBV backbones for vaccine production in other systems, such as tissue culture. And this strategy could also be used for generating backbones for other virus types for vaccine production.MethodsInstitutional approval was not needed for any of the experiments performed in this paper.Cell cultureMadin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells and human embryonic kidney 293 T cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone) and 10 U penicillin per mL, 10 mg streptomycin per mL (Gibco) and grown at 37 °C and 5% CO2.Virus growth in eggs, plaque assay, and hemagglutination assayIBV strains were grown in 8–10 day old embryonated chicken eggs (Charles River) for various time points and temperatures. Allantoic fluid was harvested and spun at 290 x g for 5 min at 4 °C and supernatant was aliquoted and frozen at −80 °C. Viral titer was determined using standard plaque assay on MDCK cells and immunostained using pool of monoclonal mouse antibodies against various strains of IBV. For plaque purification, individual plaques were identified and collected using 200 μl pipets and mixed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (Gibco) and injected into eggs for amplification. Hemagglutination assay14 was performed by serially diluting (1:2) virus supernatant with PBS (Gibco) in a V-bottom 96-well plate (Fisher) and 50 µl of 0.5% chicken red blood cells were added and incubated at 4 °C for 30 min. Hemagglutination units were determined by the reciprocal of the last dilution which showed complete hemagglutination.Cloning influenza B virus segments into rescue plasmidsViral RNA was extracted from the allantoic supernatant using E. Z. N. A. Viral RNA kit (Omega Bio-Tek) according to the manufacturer guidelines. Viral segments were amplified by RT-PCR using Superscript III one-step RT-PCR kit (Invitrogen) and segment specific primers (supplementary table 5). RT-PCR products were gel purified (QIAGEN). pDZ plasmid was digested with SapI restriction enzyme (New England biolabs) and treated with alkaline phosphatase (New England biolabs) and gel purified. Purified RT-PCR products were cloned into digested pDZ plasmid using In-Fusion kit (Takara bio). Plasmid sequences were confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Psomogen).Generation of recombinant influenza B virusesRecombinant IBVs were generated by transfection of 293 T cells with plasmids containing viral segments16. Briefly, 8 plasmids encoding viral segments are co-transfected using TransIT LT1 (Mirus) and optimem (Gibco) according to manufacturer guidelines. 293 T cells (2 × 105 cells/mL) are mixed with DNA/TransIT LT1 mixture and plated in a 6-well plate. 24 h later media is changed to infection media (1XMEM (Gibco)), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 0.2% BSA (MP biomedicals), 1 mg/mL of N-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin and the cells are incubated for 2 days at 33 °C. The supernatant is harvested and injected into 8–10 day old embryonated chicken eggs and incubated for 3 days at 33 °C. Allantoic fluid is harvested and hemagglutination assay is performed to check for presence of virus. Viruses were plaque purified and stocks were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C.Deep sequencing and data analysisIn order to get consensus sequences and monitor polymorphisms during passage, viruses were deep sequenced. Viral RNA was extracted and prepared for RNA-seq25. Briefly, viral RNA was extracted using E. Z. N. A. viral RNA kit (Omega Bio-Tek) and the samples were prepared to run on illumna. Raw data was aligned using NGen DNASTAR lasergene and Integrative genomics viewer (IGV)26. Genbank accession numbers are listed in supplementary table 4.Phylogenetic analysisAll the consensus sequences for HA and NP were compiled into single files and changed to fasta format using online server EMBOSS seqret (EMBL-EBI). The consensus sequences were aligned and analyzed with Clustal Omega (EMBL-EBI). Phylogenetic trees were visualized with Figtree v1.4.4 (http:/ree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).Virus purification/concentrationViruses were grown in 10-day old eggs and allantoic fluid was harvested and clarified by centrifugation at 290 x g using a benchtop centrifuge (Eppendorf) at 4 °C for 5 min. The clarified supernatant was concentrated using a 30% sucrose cushion in NTE buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) at pH 8) by centrifugation in a Beckman L7-65 ultracentrifuge at 87041.1 x g for 2 h at 4 °C using a Beckman SW28 rotor. Supernatant was aspirated and pellets were resuspended in PBS and stored at −80 °C in small aliquots.Western blot and protein quantificationPurified viruses were quantified using pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo fisher) and 20 ng of protein was mixed with pierce lane marker reducing sample buffer (Thermo fisher). Purified viruses were run on 10% reducing denaturing sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (Bio-Rad) and the protein was transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane (Bio-Rad) using turbo transfer system (Bio-Rad). The membrane was blocked with 5% (w/v) non-fat milk in PBS containing 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20 (PBST) for 1 h at room temperature on a shaker. The membrane was incubated with KL-BHA-4C1017 (1:2000) diluted in 5% non-fat milk in PBST overnight at 4 °C on a shaker. The membrane was washed with PBST three times (5 min incubation each time) on a shaker at room temperature. The membrane was incubated with anti-mouse-HRP (horseradish peroxidase) IgG diluted in 5% milk in PBST (1:2000) for 1 h at room temperature on a shaker. The membrane was washed three times with PBST and developed using Brightstar HCL (ASI). The HRP was killed by incubating the membrane with 1% sodium azide for 15 min on a shaker at room temperature. The membrane is washed overnight with PBST (changed several times) on a shaker. The membrane was incubated with polyclonal antibody against NP (Invitrogen, PA5-81758) diluted in 5% Milk/PBST (1:2000) overnight at 4 °C on a shaker. The membrane was washed three times and incubated with anti-rabbit-HRP diluted in 5% milk/PBST (1:2000) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature on a shaker. The membrane was washed three times and developed with Brightstar HCL. Uncropped version of blots is in supplementary fig. 4.Deglycosylation of virion proteinsPurified viruses were quantified using pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo fisher) and 20 µg of total protein was treated with PNGase F (New England Biolabs) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 20 µg purified viruses were mixed with glycoprotein denaturing buffer and denatured by incubating at 100 °C for 10 min. The denatured glycoproteins were cooled on ice and briefly centrifuged using a table top centrifuge (Eppendorf). Glyco Buffer 2, 10% NP-40 and PNGase F was added and the samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Samples were analyzed by mobility shifts on 12% SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad). The gel was stained with coomassie staining (10% acetic acid (v/v), 40% methanol (v/v), 0.5% R250 brilliant blue R (w/v)) and destained (20% methanol (v/v), 10% acetic acid (v/v)). Uncropped version of gels are in supplementary fig. 3.Mass spectrometry/Absolute quantification of HAFive concentrated influenza viruses (B/Great Lakes/1739/54 WT, B/Hawaii/10/2001 WT, B/Florida/4/2006 MA WT, rM3P67/GL/HN, rM3P67/HI/HN, rM3P67) were first normalized to 50 µg of total protein based on a Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific, according to manufacturer’s instructions) in 150 µL of PBS then 50uL of buffer consisting of 8 M urea (Invitrogen), 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Invitrogen), and 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Invitrogen) was added to achieve a final volume of 200 µL. Samples were incubated in a thermomixer at 60 °C for 30 minutes at 5 × g. Iodoacetamide was added to alkylate free cysteines, and samples were incubated for 45 min in the dark. Samples were then digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme: protein) ratio and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Samples were desalted on a C18 column (mini spin, Nest Group) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were eluted from these columns with 100 µL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Digested samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80 °C until analysis.Two HA peptides (QLPNLLR and SKPYYTGEHAK) were synthesized containing a C-terminal 13C6,15N2-lysine or 13C6,15N4-arginine residue and quantified by amino acid analysis (Thermo Scientific)27. Synthetic peptides were individually diluted from 1 mM to 1fM in 0.5 µg/µL trypsin-digested Bovine Serum Albumin (New England Biolabs) in 0.1% FA and analyzed by a 20-minute mass spectrometry method to determine the range of concentrations that yielded to a linear response with mass spectrometry intensity. Trypsin-digested virus samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and the synthetic peptides were spiked into the samples to a final concentration of 2.5 µM each, which was within the linear range. Samples were diluted 1:15 and analyzed by a 70-minute mass spectrometry method described below.All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (30 cm × 75 μm (ID)) packed with ReprosilPur 1.9 μm particles. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over 60 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 3 μL of mobile phase A. All samples were analyzed with the following Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) settings. An MS1 scan was acquired over a m/z range of 375-1025 in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolutions (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument-controlled ion injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s, with a 10 ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2–6 were selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, with three seconds of MS/MS scans per cycle. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 15,000 resolutions (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30% and an instrument-controlled ion injection time and mass range.To quantify peptide concentrations, precursor ion chromatograms were extracted from the MS1 scans for the synthetic (“heavy”) and endogenous (“light”) HA peptides using Skyline (version 21.2)28. Only the 2+ charge states of each precursor were quantified. The peak areas integrated over time was summed for all isotopic peaks of each precursor distribution of each peptide, and the light:heavy peptide ratios were calculated. The final concentration of HA peptide in each sample was calculated by multiplying the light:heavy peptide ratio by the final concentration of the synthetic peptide in the sample (i.e., 2.5 µM). HA content was calculated by averaging the HA peptide concentrations (in molar amounts) for the two peptides and converting HA peptide/protein molarity to HA protein amount (in µg) by multiplying by the molecular weight of HA and the dilution factor used to obtain the 50 µg sample. The % HA content was calculated by dividing the total HA protein amount by the total protein amount measured by Bradford assay.AnalysisStatistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 9.3.1 (471)). Biorender was used to generate schematics. Adobe illustrator (version 26.0.1) was used to compile the figures.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available within the paper. GenBank accession numbers and SRA accession numbers are listed in supplementary table 4. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE29 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD036269. ReferencesKrammer, F. et al. Influenza. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 4, 3 (2018).Article PubMed Google Scholar Centers for disease control and prevention (CDC), https://gis.cdc.gov/GRASP/Fluview/PedFluDeath.html (2020).Bernard N. Fields, D. M. K., P. M. Howley. Vol. 2 Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia (2013).Osterhaus, A. D., Rimmelzwaan, G. F., Martina, B. E., Bestebroer, T. M. & Fouchier, R. A. Influenza B virus in seals. Science 288, 1051–1053 (2000).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tsai, C. P. & Tsai, H. J. Influenza B viruses in pigs, Taiwan. Influenza Other Respir. Viruses 13, 91–105 (2019).Article PubMed Google Scholar Rota, P. A. et al. Cocirculation of two distinct evolutionary lineages of influenza type B virus since 1983. Virology 175, 59–68 (1990).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nogales, A. & Martinez-Sobrido, L. Reverse genetics approaches for the development of influenza vaccines. Int J. Mol. Sci. 18, 20 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Neumann, G. & Kawaoka, Y. Genetic engineering of influenza and other negative-strand RNA viruses containing segmented genomes. Adv. Virus Res 53, 265–300 (1999).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Neumann, G. et al. Generation of influenza A viruses entirely from cloned cDNAs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96, 9345–9350 (1999).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fodor, E. et al. Rescue of influenza A virus from recombinant DNA. J. Virol. 73, 9679–9682 (1999).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nachbagauer, R. & Palese, P. Is a universal influenza virus vaccine possible? Annu Rev. Med 71, 315–327 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sautto, G. A., Kirchenbaum, G. A. & Ross, T. M. Towards a universal influenza vaccine: different approaches for one goal. Virol. J. 15, 17 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ping, J., Lopes, T. J., Neumann, G. & Kawaoka, Y. Development of high-yield influenza B virus vaccine viruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, E8296–E8305 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar White, K. M. et al. Influenza B virus reverse genetic backbones with improved growth properties in the EB66(R) cell line as basis for vaccine seed virus generation. Vaccine 36, 1146–1153 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Quinlivan, M. et al. Attenuation of equine influenza viruses through truncations of the NS1 protein. J. Virol. 79, 8431–8439 (2005).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martinez-Sobrido, L. & Garcia-Sastre, A. Generation of recombinant influenza virus from plasmid DNA. J. Vis. Exp. 3, 2057 (2010). Google Scholar Asthagiri Arunkumar, G. et al. Broadly cross-reactive, nonneutralizing antibodies against influenza B virus hemagglutinin demonstrate effector function-dependent protection against lethal viral challenge in mice. J. Virol. 93, e01696–18 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, E. H. et al. Generation of a high-growth influenza vaccine Strain in MDCK cells for vaccine preparedness. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 28, 997–1006 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ping, J. et al. Development of high-yield influenza A virus vaccine viruses. Nat. Commun. 6, 8148 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Lei, N. et al. Molecular evolution of influenza B virus during 2011-2017 in Chaoyang, Beijing, suggesting the free influenza vaccine policy. Sci. Rep. 9, 2432 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Santos, A. et al. SUMOylation affects the interferon blocking activity of the influenza A nonstructural protein NS1 without affecting its stability or cellular localization. J. Virol. 87, 5602–5620 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jackson, D., Elderfield, R. A. & Barclay, W. S. Molecular studies of influenza B virus in the reverse genetics era. J. Gen. Virol. 92, 1–17 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sun, W. et al. Newcastle disease virus (NDV) expressing the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 as a live virus vaccine candidate. EBioMedicine 62, 103132 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sun, W. et al. A newcastle disease virus (NDV) expressing a membrane-anchored spike as a cost-effective inactivated SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine. Vaccines (Basel) 8, 771 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Munoz-Moreno, R. et al. Viral fitness landscapes in diverse host species reveal multiple evolutionary lines for the NS1 gene of influenza A viruses. Cell Rep. 29, 3997–4009 e3995 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Robinson, J. T. et al. Integrative genomics viewer. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 24–26 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gerber, S. A., Rush, J., Stemman, O., Kirschner, M. W. & Gygi, S. P. Absolute quantification of proteins and phosphoproteins from cell lysates by tandem MS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 6940–6945 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar MacLean, B. et al. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 26, 966–968 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database resources in 2022: a hub for mass spectrometry-based proteomics evidences. Nucleic. Acids Res. 50, D543–D552 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Guha Asthagiri Arunkumar for providing influenza B HA antibody, Benjamin tenOever for virus stock sequencing and Peter Palese for useful discussions and suggestions. We would also like to thank Richard Cadagan, Maryline Panis, and Zenab Khan for technical assistance. We would also like to thank Zain Khalil and Ana Silvia Gonzalez-Reiche for assistant with sequences. This study was partly funded by the Center for Research for Pathogenesis and Transmission (CRIPT), a NIAID supported Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (CEIRR, contract # 75N93021C00014), and SEM-CIVIC, a NIAID supported Collaborative Influenza Vaccine Innovation Center (contract # 75N93019C00051) to AG-S.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USASadaf Aslam, Madhusudan Rajendran, Andrew Kurland, Jeffrey Johnson, Florian Krammer, Adolfo García-Sastre & Juan AyllonGlobal Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USASadaf Aslam, Andrew Kurland, Jeffrey Johnson, Adolfo García-Sastre & Juan AyllonDepartment of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USADivya Kriti & Harm van BakelDepartment of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USAFlorian Krammer & Adolfo García-SastreDepartment of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USAAdolfo García-SastreThe Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY, 10029, USAAdolfo García-SastreDepartment of Health Sciences, University of Burgos, Burgos, SpainJuan AyllonAuthorsSadaf AslamView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMadhusudan RajendranView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDivya KritiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew KurlandView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeffrey JohnsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHarm van BakelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFlorian KrammerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdolfo García-SastreView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJuan AyllonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJ.A., F.K. and A.G.-S. conceived and design the project. J.A. and S.A. performed the experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. M.R. performed experiment. D.K. and H.V.B. generated consensus sequences. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Adolfo García-Sastre or Juan Ayllon.Ethics declarations Competing interests The A.G.-S. laboratory has received research support from Pfizer, Senhwa Biosciences, Kenall Manufacturing, Avimex, Johnson & Johnson, Dynavax, 7Hills Pharma, Pharmamar, ImmunityBio, Accurius, Nanocomposix, Hexamer, N-fold LLC, Model Medicines, Atea Pharma and Merck, outside of the reported work. A.G.-S. has consulting agreements for the following companies involving cash and/or stock: Vivaldi Biosciences, Contrafect, 7Hills Pharma, Avimex, Vaxalto, Pagoda, Accurius, Esperovax, Farmak, Applied Biological Laboratories, Pharmamar, Paratus, CureLab Oncology, CureLab Veterinary, Synairgen and Pfizer, outside of the reported work. A.G.-S. is inventor on patents and patent applications on the use of antivirals and vaccines for the treatment and prevention of virus infections, owned by the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York. The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai has filed patent applications relating to influenza vaccine, influenza mAbs, SARS-CoV-2 serological assays and NDV-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines which list Florian Krammer as co-inventor. Florian Krammer has consulted for Merck and Pfizer (before 2020), and is currently consulting for Pfizer, Third Rock Ventures, Seqirus and Avimex. The Krammer laboratory is also collaborating with Pfizer on animal models of SARS-CoV-2 and with Dynavax on influenza vaccine development. Sadaf Aslam and Juan Ayllon are co-inventors on patent application for vaccines production for influenza viruses. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationsupplementary fileREPORTING SUMMARYRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleAslam, S., Rajendran, M., Kriti, D. et al. Generation of a high yield vaccine backbone for influenza B virus in embryonated chicken eggs. npj Vaccines 8, 12 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-023-00603-3Download citationReceived: 06 February 2022Accepted: 17 January 2023Published: 10 February 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-023-00603-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by The role of vaccines in the COVID-19 pandemic: what have we learned? Florian Krammer Seminars in Immunopathology (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Content types Journal Information About the Editors Contact Open Access Calls for Papers Editorial policies Article Processing Charges Journal Metrics About the Partner Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies npj Vaccines (npj Vaccines) ISSN 2059-0105 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyCan you get bird flu? The pandemic risk of avian influenza, explained. | VoxSkip to main contentThe homepageVoxVox logoExplainersPoliticsCultureAdviceListenAudioWatchVideoMenuThe homepageVoxVox logoNavigation DrawercloseCloseSearchVideoWatchAudioListenCrosswordPlayExplainersPoliticsCultureAdviceScienceTechnologyClimateHealthMoneyLifeFuture PerfectNewslettersBecome a MemberLogin / Sign UpFacebookInstagramYoutubeRSSTikTokVoxVox logoCan you get bird flu?Fearless journalism needs your support now more than everOur mission could not be more clear and more necessary: We have a duty to explain what just happened, and why, and what it means for you. We need clear-eyed journalism that helps you understand what really matters. Reporting that brings clarity in increasingly chaotic times. Reporting that is driven by truth, not by what people in power want you to believe.We rely on readers like you to fund our journalism. Will you support our work and become a Vox Member today?Support VoxScienceCan you get bird flu?The H5N1 avian flu virus isn’t a major human threat today. Here’s what it’d take to become one.by Keren Landman, MD and Benji JonesUpdated Feb 6, 2023, 2:23 PM UTCFacebookLinkChickens at a farm in Sheffield, Illinois. Daniel Acker/Bloomberg via Getty ImagesMaybe you’ve noticed: Eggs are really expensive.By late last year, the average cost of a dozen Grade A large eggs had more than doubled since January. They’ve been so pricey — more than $10 at certain retailers — that some people are now smuggling them into the US from Mexico.One major culprit? The spread of avian influenza, a.k.a. bird flu.The viral disease has wiped out tens of millions of wild and farmed birds in the US, including egg-laying hens, many of which were not infected but were culled to stop the flu from spreading. The ongoing surge is now considered the largest avian influenza outbreak in US history.A grocery worker stocks shelves with eggs in Detroit, Michigan, on January 18. Matthew Hatcher/Bloomberg via Getty ImagesThere’s some comfort in the name, avian influenza. The virus that’s been tearing through poultry farms, known as H5N1, typically targets birds, not humans.But a recent outbreak of H5N1 at a mink fur farm in Spain has some scientists worried. Farms with dense populations of minks — which are mammals, like us — are ideal places for this virus to acquire new mutations or other genetic changes that could help it spread more easily between humans. And testing at the fur farm revealed the virus had already acquired at least one such mutation.Meanwhile, wildlife monitoring has shown some other mammals have recently contracted bird flu, including a few grizzly bears in Montana, skunks, and otters.This makes us wonder: Is bird flu creeping closer to humans?The short answer: no. In its current form, H5N1 doesn’t have the machinery to easily infect humans or spread quickly among us. That’s the good news. What is concerning is that avian influenza viruses are known to change quickly — especially when they’re abundant and spreading among certain animal populations. Hence why some scientists are worried now.“Avian influenza is near the top of the list in terms of viruses that have pandemic potential,” Daniel Olson, an epidemiologist at the University of Colorado, told Vox. “Coronaviruses are up there, too, but avian influenza is just as high — and maybe even higher.”That doesn’t mean avian influenza is about to become the next pandemic. Yet experts are on alert, and are looking for any signs that the situation might change. Here’s what to know about the current human risk of bird flu.What it would take for bird flu to become a human pandemicThe H5N1 virus that’s spreading now was first detected in the ’90s, at a goose farm in southern China, making it a relatively new type of avian influenza. (There are other strains of bird flu, but for the purposes of this article, we’ll use “bird flu” to mean H5N1.)In the decades since, the virus has mostly been a problem for birds, especially domestic poultry. It’s highly contagious, and infection can cause severe damage to birds’ internal organs. Outbreaks of the virus can wipe out 90 percent or more of farm birds within 48 hours. Avian influenza infects wild birds like snow geese, pictured here. Jim Watson/AFP via Getty ImagesA number of mammals including humans have also become infected over the years. While it can kill us — H5N1 has a frighteningly high mortality rate — this virus has yet to become widespread or approach anything close to a pandemic.For any pathogen to have the potential to cause a human pandemic, it has to have three important qualities, according to several flu experts. It must spread easily among humans, particularly through the air. It must cause human disease. And it must be something that most of our immune systems haven’t encountered before — that is, it must be novel.Thankfully, H5N1 doesn’t meet all of these criteria.For one, it doesn’t have the right machinery to efficiently infect our bodies and isn’t easily transmitted between them.To infiltrate a host, viruses first have to bind to certain receptors on the surface of their cells. The virus that’s currently spreading, H5N1, does this using a specific kind of protein known as hemagglutinin 5, or H5. You can think of H5 as a key and receptors as the locks.Following this metaphor, H5 can unlock certain receptors found in cells that line the respiratory and digestive tracts of birds. By invading those cells and replicating, the virus can damage these vital systems, making it difficult for the birds to breathe and easy for them to spread the virus among themselves (through breath and feces).Humans have some similar, avian-type receptors in our respiratory systems, too. But for reasons scientists don’t fully understand, they don’t make us as vulnerable to avian flu as birds are. Critically, we also have a higher number of different, non-avian-type receptor that bird flu viruses don’t like to bind to quite as much. The abundance of those non-avian receptors in our noses seems to protect us from being easily infected by viruses like H5N1.The upshot: H5N1 doesn’t easily bind to cells in our airways, so it’s harder for the virus to infect us. Humans can still be infected, but likely only if we’re exposed to a large amount of virus or the conditions are just right for transmission (though scientists don’t know what those conditions are, exactly). Most people who have come down with bird flu spent a more-than-casual amount of time around birds, usually while working with or around sick flocks.“If you look at all the H5 infections over the past two decades or more, the vast majority of those reported exposure to sick or dying poultry prior to the infection,” said Richard Webby, a virologist specializing in animal and bird influenza at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital.Flu viruses that can’t cause infection in humans’ airways are much harder to transmit among humans — and therefore, they can’t cause a pandemic. Unless something changes.Bird flu evolves quickly. That’s what makes it a threat.If there’s anything concerning about the current bird flu, it’s that it could mutate and evolve. If it’s not a threat to humans today, it could become one.That’s because influenza viruses are incredibly changeable. Like other viruses, H5N1 picks up small mutations as it replicates within a host; over time, that can give the virus certain benefits (though mutations are often bad for the virus).But influenza viruses can also undergo much bigger and more consequential shifts through a process called reassortment.Reassortment is like something out of science fiction: When two influenza viruses infect the same cell in the same host, they can trade entire chunks of their genomes with each other, yielding a variety of Franken-flus.That’s why it’s a red flag for researchers when avian flu spreads among animals that can also easily get sick with other kinds of influenza. Pigs, for example, have flu receptors in their respiratory systems that both human and bird viruses easily bind to, so they can get infected with both. Should these two viruses meet inside these animals, they might swap parts, producing an avian flu that can more easily infect mammals.The same is true for mink: They can be infected by both avian and mammalian influenza. (The famous and particularly devastating 1918 pandemic likely originated in birds and may have passed through a mammal before jumping to humans.)Experts fear that in “mixing vessels” like pigs or mink, H5N1 could exchange a segment of its genome that makes it easily transmissible among birds for one that makes it easily transmissible among mammals — and, eventually, to humans. In theory, that could lead to the creation of a virus with all of H5N1’s other bad personality traits — its ability to cause severe disease, for example — with the added advantage of, say, being able to easily infiltrate cells in our airways.(There are some signs that the H5N1 virus that spread through the Spanish mink farm picked up a mutation that’s known to help it replicate more easily in mammals. It’s not clear, however, if the virus picked up the mutation before or after spreading to minks.)A mink at a fur farm in Denmark on November 14, 2020. Ole Jensen/Getty ImagesThese major genetic shifts are so worrying because they can produce novel viruses that humans have never been exposed to. Although our immune systems likely would be able to recognize and fight off a common strain of flu that’s mutated slightly over time, it’s much harder to mount a quick response to a brand new strain.The potential to evolve novelty is what puts bird flu on the pandemic potential radar, according to Seema Lakdawala, a virologist and influenza A transmission specialist at Emory University. “Pandemics emerge with shifts,” she said.Rest assured, not all genetic shifts produce a pathogen with pandemic potential, said Lakdawala. Plus, even if H5N1 does evolve a way to more easily invade our airways, that doesn’t guarantee it will be able to spread among humans. To be easily transmissible, the virus also needs to replicate efficiently once it’s inside the cell, and survive in the air after it’s expelled in a cough or a sneeze.There’s little evidence that bird flu has adapted to spread easily between mammals, much less between humans. Emerging evidence suggests that in many H5N1 cases among wild animals — and in the latest mink farm cases — infections among multiple animals likely occurred not because of transmission between animals, but because several animals all ate infected birds loaded with virus.The real public health risk of bird fluThere’s more good news: Even if bird flu does evolve tools to infiltrate a human host and spread among us, we have tools of our own to detect and combat the virus.The US government already has a stockpile of human vaccines for bird flu, including those specifically for H5N1, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). There are also vaccines available for farm birds (though they’re not widely used, for reasons that Vox’s Kenny Torrella explains here).Meanwhile, oseltamivir, a drug commonly used to treat more common types of flu infections, has been effective at treating human cases of H5 flu. And surveillance of flu in human and animal populations is a global health priority.A flock of turkeys at a farm in Conowingo, Maryland. Edwin Remsberg/VWPics/Universal Images Group via Getty ImagesBird flu does, however, pose an immediate threat to humans, not because we’re at risk of infection but because it’s squeezing the global food supply, according to Carol Cardona, an avian health expert at the University of Minnesota.Eggs and other poultry products, as well as some wild birds, have long been relatively cheap and vital sources of protein in much of the world. Should avian influenza continue to rip through large farms, or spread to backyard coops, it could extend the cost-of-living crisis.“The risk to humans is through food and food supply,” Cardona said. “And the people who are being cut off from food supply are at the lowest economic level.”The US Department of Agriculture and the CDC monitor flu viruses found in both people and animals for signs of a novel virus with the potential to cause human disease — a critical component of pandemic preparedness, said Tim Uyeki, a medical epidemiologist and bird flu expert at the CDC. Although the disruptive virus freshest in our minds might be a coronavirus, most human respiratory pandemics in recent memory — those of 1918, 1957, 1968, and 2009 — have been caused by novel influenza A viruses.“Constant vigilance and surveillance is needed worldwide to monitor the potential threat of these and other viruses as they evolve,” Uyeki said.Changes to the environment like deforestation and a warming climate are also leading to more intermingling of different species and the infectious organisms that call them home — including flu. “We have humans and animals living closer together on a larger scale than we have in the past,” Olson said.That intermingling could at some point create a flu with human pandemic potential, said Lakdawala. “The more attempts these viruses make right at jumping across these hurdles, the more likely they are that some of them may be successful,” she said. “Nature is so good at doing this.”Or as Cardona put it: “Never bet against a flu virus.”You’ve read 1 article in the last monthHere at Vox, we're unwavering in our commitment to covering the issues that matter most to you — threats to democracy, immigration, reproductive rights, the environment, and the rising polarization across this country.Our mission is to provide clear, accessible journalism that empowers you to stay informed and engaged in shaping our world. By becoming a Vox Member, you directly strengthen our ability to deliver in-depth, independent reporting that drives meaningful change.We rely on readers like you — join us.Swati SharmaVox Editor-in-ChiefMembershipMonthlyAnnualOne-time$5/month$10/month$25/month$50/monthOther$50/year$100/year$150/year$200/yearOther$25$50$100$250OtherJoin for $10/monthWe accept credit card, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. You can also contribute viaSee More: Bird FluClimateCultureDown to EarthHealthHealth CareInfectious DiseasePolicyPoliticsPublic HealthScienceMost PopularTrump’s tariffs could tank the economy. Will the Supreme Court stop them?Can Trump run again in 2028? Here’s what you need to know.43 lab monkeys escaped in South Carolina. They have a legal claim to freedom.Take a mental break with the newest Vox crosswordThe debate over why Harris lost is in full swing. Here’s a guide.Today, ExplainedUnderstand the world with a daily explainer plus the most compelling stories of the day.Email (required)Sign UpBy submitting your email, you agree to our Terms and Privacy Notice. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.Advertiser Content FromThis is the title for the native adMore in Science43 lab monkeys escaped in South Carolina. They have a legal claim to freedom.The world’s most mysterious psychedelic is already inside your brainWhy the Pentagon just can’t quit Elon MuskAudioWhy do we love to scare ourselves?DNA from wild organisms could save your life — but there’s a catchIs climate change really making hurricanes worse?Future PerfectNov 1143 lab monkeys escaped in South Carolina. They have a legal claim to freedom.Who owns the escaped monkeys now? It’s more complicated than you might think.By Angela Fernandez and Justin MarceauThe HighlightNov 4Member ExclusiveThe world’s most mysterious psychedelic is already inside your brainDMT, “the nuclear bomb of the psychedelic family,” explained.By Oshan JarowDefense & SecurityNov 3Member ExclusiveWhy the Pentagon just can’t quit Elon MuskHow Musk’s SpaceX became too big to fail for US national security.By Joshua KeatingAudioUnexplainableOct 30Why do we love to scare ourselves?This research group is studying our love for haunted houses ... at a haunted house.By Byrd PinkertonDown to EarthOct 28DNA from wild organisms could save your life — but there’s a catchInside the extremely messy, profoundly confusing fight over who should profit from non-human DNA.By Benji JonesClimateOct 18Is climate change really making hurricanes worse?What we know — and don’t know — about how global warming influences tropical storms.By Umair IrfanAdvertiser Content FromThis is the title for the native adVoxVox logoFacebookInstagramYoutubeRSSTikTokAbout usOur staffEthics & GuidelinesHow we make moneyContact usHow to pitch VoxNewslettersPrivacy NoticeTerms of UseCookie PolicyCookie SettingsLicensingAccessibilityPlatform StatusCareers© 2024 Vox Media, LLC. All Rights ReservedWhat Is Avian Influenza? - Texas A&M Today Skip to main Open Menu Texas A&M Today Texas A&M Today Science & Tech Business & Government Arts & Humanities Campus Life Health & Environment Twitter Facebook Instagram Pinterest YouTube Reddit Subscribe Press Room Search Health & Environment What Is Avian Influenza? A Texas A&M AgriLife expert explains how the virus is disrupting the poultry industry and driving up prices at the grocery store. By Maggie Berger, Texas A&M AgriLife Communications February 10, 2023 Share ShareTweet0 Shares Backyard chickens are at risk of being exposed to avian influenza by infected wild birds that have stood on the same premises.Laura McKenzie/Texas A&M AgriLife Communications Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), sometimes referred to as “bird flu,” is something that has affected almost everyone, whether they realize it or not. This is the virus that is causing disruptions in the poultry industry, triggering a price increase on eggs and other poultry products in the grocery store not felt since the last time the U.S. experienced a major avian influenza outbreak in 2015. But this time is different, according to Texas A&M AgriLife experts. Martin Ficken, resident director at the Texas A&M Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory (TVMDL) in Gonzales, is an expert in poultry diseases with an emphasis on HPAI. Below, he explains what makes this virus so devastating and what should be done if you think you have an infected flock. What is avian influenza? It is a viral infection in the same class as human influenza and can present as a respiratory infection. Avian influenza has a high morbidity and mortality rate, approaching 100%. An infected bird will infect other birds very quickly, with death almost certain with 48 hours. Where does avian influenza come from and how is it spread? The virus has been spread around the country to every state in the U.S. except Hawaii by the wild bird population. They serve as carriers and spread it as they migrate. Poultry and other birds can pick up the virus particles via respiratory exposure as well as through feces. Poultry can pick it up simply by being in the same space where an infected wild bird once stood. While avian influenza is of greater concern to commercial poultry producers, backyard flock owners can have birds become infected. The virus thrives in cold weather. Previous outbreaks in the U.S. have subsided in summer months due to the heat, however, the most recent outbreak that began in 2021 did not. It diminished, but never completely went away, so it is no longer considered an exotic virus that can be eradicated. It is here to stay. What symptoms should poultry owners look for in their flock? The first thing people will likely notice is dead birds. They may also notice birds that are lethargic, have ruffled feathers or look depressed. Essentially, what you would imagine when you think of a sick bird. If people happen to see an infected bird while still alive, it will very likely die within hours to a day. What should you do if you suspect a bird in your flock has avian influenza? There really is no treatment for sick birds due to the morbidity and mortality rate of avian influenza. If producers suspect they have infected birds, the best thing to do is contact the Texas Animal Health Commission, TVMDL or their local Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service agent. Anyone at those agencies can guide them through the appropriate next steps, which will include submitting samples to TVMDL for testing. A confirmed positive test triggers a series of regulatory processes that could eventually result in facility quarantine and depopulation. What can producers do to protect their flocks against avian influenza? The most important thing for anyone raising poultry is to be vigilant and strict with their biosecurity measures. Prevention is really the only treatment for avian influenza. While it would be best not to let others on your poultry premise, if you must, make sure they follow all biosecurity protocols such as a change of clothes and shoes. It would also be best if producers didn’t visit other poultry premises and follow strict biosecurity guidelines themselves. While it may seem harmless to do something as simple as wearing the same pair of shoes into your building as you wore to the grocery store, you don’t know where people at the store have been and what you could be carrying back to your flock. Prevention and biosecurity are key factors in protecting flocks. The same general principles apply to backyard flock owners as well. It is also important not to let your poultry comingle with wild birds or in areas where wild birds have access, especially ponds that may attract ducks and geese. That is where some of the positive cases in Texas originated. Can I get avian influenza? At this time, human contraction is not a concern. Birds and eggs destined for the food supply are tested for avian influenza. If a bird with the virus particles were to inadvertently be consumed, standard cooking protocols would kill the virus. While no positive cases in humans have been found, there have been several mammal species that have contracted the virus and most are considered dead-end hosts, meaning they will not pass it on. The U.S. Department of Agriculture has reported avian influenza in raccoons, skunks, bears, bobcats, foxes, coyotes, harbor seals and bottlenose dolphins. With the exception of the seals and dolphins, those cases were all in the northern portions of the continental U.S. How many positive cases has Texas had? Texas has had three poultry premises test positive for birds with the virus, but at this time, none were commercial premises. Additionally, there have been a number of wild birds and zoo animals testing positive in the state. As of the beginning of February, on a nationwide basis, there have been 403 positive commercial poultry premises and 342 positive non-commercial premises in 47 states. Louisiana and West Virginia are the only two states to have only wild bird detections at this time. A total of 49 states have had 5,956 detections in 142 species of wild birds. Cartons of eggs inside a Brookshire Brothers in College Station on Jan. 23.Michael Miller/Texas A&M AgriLife Communications What happens next? Regulatory agencies will continue to monitor the spread of avian influenza. Testing will continue to be done on birds and eggs destined for the food supply and regularly mandated testing will continue for commercial premises. No vaccine is currently available, but that is being discussed as a possible solution. The high morbidity and mortality rate of the virus, coupled with depopulations for infected flocks, will continue to influence egg and poultry prices at the grocery store. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, at this time, more than 58 million birds have been affected by avian influenza. As of January, the USDA Economic Research Service reports that over 43 million of those losses were in commercial egg-laying operations. When a major laying operation goes down, millions of eggs are no longer being added to the supply chain daily. It will take time for affected premises to repopulate their flocks and time for consumers to feel that effect at the grocery store. Additional information on avian influenza and biosecurity practices can be found here: tx.ag/AIandBiosecurity. Those interested in avian testing should call one of TVMDL’s poultry laboratories in Gonzales or Center, or one of the agency’s full-service laboratories in College Station or Canyon. For more information on TVMDL’s testing services, visit tvmdl.tamu.edu. ShareTweet0 Shares Share ShareTweet0 Shares This article by Maggie Berger originally appeared on AgriLife Today. Related Stories Culture & Society Wing Prices Inch Higher Heading Into Super Bowl An estimated 1.45 billion wings and drumsticks will be eaten during Super Bowl weekend. A Texas A&M AgriLife economist explains how this annual spike in demand is impacting prices. Health & Environment Avian Influenza Not Expected To Disrupt Thanksgiving Turkey Prices And Stock With the holiday approaching, a Texas A&M poultry scientist says its still best to buy your bird early in case of future price increases. Business & Government Poultry Science Professor Finds Niche In Commercial Duck Research Texas A&M researcher Greg Archer focuses on applied methods to help the industry modernize and grow. Recent Stories Science & Tech Rugged Terrain No Match For ‘CLAWbot’ The wheeled robot has potential applications in agriculture, search and rescue, disaster response, and military operations. Culture & Society Texas A&M Researchers Assess Service Needs And Barriers For Texas Veterans Mental health counseling, business training and alternative therapy are the top service issues identified by Texas veterans. Campus Life Texas Veterans Commission Awards Texas A&M University For Service To Veterans Texas A&M selected as Gold Recipient of the 2024 Veteran Education Excellence Recognition Award for outstanding service to student veterans. View Archives → Subscribe Subscribe to the Texas A&M Today newsletter for the latest news and stories every week. Please enable JavaScript in your browser to complete this form.Email *WebsiteSubscribe Twitter Facebook Instagram Pinterest YouTube Reddit News Hub Archives Contact: 979.845.4641 [email protected] © 2024 Texas A&M University Site Policies Accessibility Back to topVeterinarian tracks canine influenza in North America - News - VIN close VIN PublicLog out Front Page Message Boards Search Search Main Page Pub Med Search Feeback Search Help Search Preferences Rounds Library Library Main Page VINcyclopedia of Diseases (Formerly Associate) Calculators Conference Proceedings Drug Resources Drug Resources (mobile) Journals News Specialty Centers Student Center Learn Anatomy in 3D LIBRARY QUICK LINKS VINcyclopedia of Diseases (Formerly Associate) Calculators Conference Proceedings Drug Resources Journals Learn Anatomy in 3D News Specialty Centers Student Center VIN Veterinary Drug Handbook Library main page LIBRARY QUICK LINKS VINcyclopedia of Diseases (Formerly Associate) Calculators Conference Proceedings Drug Resources Journals Learn Anatomy in 3D News Specialty Centers Student Center VIN Veterinary Drug Handbook LIBRARY LIBRARY Books & VINcyclopedia of Diseases (Formerly Associate) Calculators & Conversion Tables Clinical Research & Surveys Conference Proceedings Dictionaries Drug Resources Forms & Handouts Guidelines, Notes, Case Studies, FAQs Journals Multimedia Library Main Page News Practice Management Aids Procedures & Techniques Public Health & Disaster Management Rounds & Discussions Specialty Centers The Student Center Vet-to-Vet About pages Website of the Week (WOW) Miscellaneous Archives Library main page CE MyVIN HELP Help FAQ VIN 101 VIN Mobile Help Feedback More... CattleDog Publishing eVetSites Veterinary Partner VetQuest Classifieds VetzInsight VIN Foundation VIN News Service VIN Store VSPN All resources - Client Education - Clinical Updates - Conference Proceedings - Drug Resources - Images/Audio/Visual - Journal Abstracts - Message Boards - Medical FAQ - Rounds - VINcyclopedia of Diseases - VIN Veterinary Drug Handbook (VVDH) Search ShowMe Hints Chat MyActivities VINdex Feedback Hi VIN VIN PublicLog out Launch VIN Chat VIN Usage Change Your Password Renew Membership Update Signature Update Credit Card All VIN - Client Education - Clinical Updates - Conference Proceedings - Drug Resources - Images/Audio/Visual - Journal Abstracts - Message Boards - Medical FAQ - Rounds - VINcyclopedia of Diseases - VIN Veterinary Drug Handbook (VVDH) GO × Email Document Send To Email: Oops! Please enter a valid Email address! Clear Send Cancel × Email Sent Would you like to change your VIN email? Just click here. Close Login Share: Tweet Send us feedback about this article VIN News stories are available to the public. Feel free to share with your clients and social media using these buttons. Veterinarian tracks canine influenza in North America Invites practitioners to help build map of cases Published: February 10, 2023 By Lisa Wogan Series See related stories » Canine-flu-map Screenshot of Tableau map Filling an information gap in veterinary medicine, an infectious diseases expert in Canada has begun mapping cases of canine influenza in North America. The latest map, above, shows the locations of reports submitted by veterinarians and identified through research since August through Jan. 11. Click to view interactive map. Canine influenza has been hopscotching around the country of late. Since December, the highly transmissible respiratory disease has been confirmed in dogs in Alabama, Arizona, California, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and possibly other states. Keeping track of infections that crop up hither and yon can be challenging. Neither the United States nor Canada has an active surveillance system for canine flu. To address the data vacuum, Dr. J. Scott Weese, an infectious diseases veterinarian at the University of Guelph's Ontario Veterinary College, launched in December a one-man mapping initiative. Weese invites veterinarians to report any laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of canine influenza or case of acute respiratory disease in a dog that has had direct contact with a laboratory-confirmed case. He collates reports in an interactive map. The map "is useful for talking to clients and facilities (for example, day cares) about risk and mitigation (such as vaccination)," Weese said in an email to the VIN News Service. "It also helps us know the degree of clinic risk that can be present, since flu can be spread in vet clinics." Canine flu is caused by influenza viruses known to infect dogs but not humans. There are two recognized strains. The first, known as H3N8, originated in horses and was first detected in the U.S. among Florida greyhounds in 2004. In brief * Dr. J. Scott Weese, an infectious diseases veterinarian at the University of Guelph's Ontario Veterinary College, has launched an initiative to track canine influenza in North America. * Weese is asking veterinarians to report confirmed and suspected dog flu cases via an online form. * Early data shows the disease is sporadic and widespread. Most recent cases in the U.S. have been caused by a second strain, H3N2, which sparked a large domestic outbreak in 2015. Evolved from an avian influenza virus in southeast Asia, H3N2 has been repeatedly carried into North America, primarily from dogs rescued from the meat trade. After the 2015 outbreak, canine flu became sporadic. Once that happened, Dr. Steve Valeika, a veterinarian and epidemiologist in North Carolina, said he stopped routinely recommending the flu vaccine. "However, I always lamented not having real-time info about whether cases were reported close by," he said. "If it continues to be sporadic, a good mapping system can help guide vaccination recommendations." The virus can cause signs in dogs similar to those in people, including coughing, which generally is mild. In severe cases, dogs might become feverish, short of breath and cough up blood — signs of hemorrhagic pneumonia. Mortality rates are estimated to be around 2%, with deaths most often reported in older dogs or dogs with underlying diseases. Vaccines can help prevent severe illness but do not prevent a dog from becoming infected or shedding the virus. Mapping canine flu About 200 veterinarians have reported cases to Weese so far. "We're getting a good idea of how widely it's spread and how patchy it is," he said, "consistent with a virus that jumps around as dogs move and can come out [of] nowhere to cause problems in a new area." Unlike human flu, the canine version isn't seasonal. "Human flu is endemic, and flu seasons occur largely because of changes in human behavior," Weese said, such as more time spent inside and in close proximity with others. "Canine flu is sporadic, and the dog-contact changes over the year are different." He said he'd expect a canine "flu season" to be associated with times that dogs travel more and spread the virus to new areas, and when they have more dog-to-dog contacts. Weese focuses his data collection effort on gathering reports from veterinarians so he can be sure they are actual flu cases. "Sometimes people say their dog has flu when it really just has an undiagnosed respiratory disease," he said. "I get some reports from the public, but those usually go into a ‘suspected' list, or I get more details." Weese is not the first to take up the surveillance challenge. When H3N2 began circulating in the U.S. in 2015, Dr. Amy Glaser at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine's Animal Health Diagnostic Center attempted to establish a voluntary reporting system, according to Edward Dubovi, a professor emeritus at the center. "Reports from diagnostic labs were displayed by state so that vets could determine if a confirmed case of canine influenza virus was reported in their state. As this was voluntary, not all states' labs participated, but Idexx did," Dubovi said, referring to one of the world's largest private veterinary diagnostic laboratories. "This was important, as they did testing for vets in all states." Dobovi said that when Glaser retired in 2019 and the number of canine flu cases was low, "the effort lost its champion." When he, too, retired soon after and Covid-19 hit the world, "all interest in this program disappeared," he added. Dubovi described Weese's mapping project as a "laudable effort" and an improvement over "Google reports, where cases may not be verified as flu." Meanwhile, factors that might lead to the creation of a more rigorous national reporting framework are probably not to be wished for. Dubovi said that sort of response could happen if "the virus becomes more virulent with high mortalities, or canine flu starts to infect owners." VIN News Service commentaries are opinion pieces presenting insights, personal experiences and/or perspectives on topical issues by members of the veterinary community. To submit a commentary for consideration, email news@vin.com. Information and opinions expressed in letters to the editor are those of the author and are independent of the VIN News Service. Letters may be edited for style. We do not verify their content for accuracy. URL: /doc/?id=11367456 Related resources Canada cracks down on illegal dog importations - July 24, 2020 Bill calls for stricter controls on imported dogs - June 19, 2020 Dog flu gets worrisome - June 11, 2018 Dog flu relatively new but not novel - March 1, 2016 Canine influenza expert calls for better border protection - April 21, 2015 Recent reports overstated canine influenza activity - January 23, 2012 Spike in dog-flu reports attracts media attention - December 22, 2011 Canine flu: How big a threat? - November 17, 2009 Share: Tweet Send us feedback about this article VIN News stories are available to the public. Feel free to share with your clients and social media using these buttons. Send us feedback about this article CLOSE Search VIN News Service Receive new story alerts Catch the podcast Follow us About us Reprint and letters policies FAQ Contact us Latest articles Colorado voters send veterinary profession in new direction - 11/7/2024 California city bans breeding of pets with 'extreme' traits - 11/5/2024 Strategic assets: The evolving role of military veterinarians - 11/1/2024 Clinical wildlife practice veterinary specialty proposed - 10/30/2024 Colorado voters share views on midlevel veterinary role - 10/24/2024 New hospitals in New Mexico bring 24/7 care to ER desert - 10/22/2024 Pet insurance advisers catch on with some animal hospitals - 10/17/2024 Turkish veterinarians decry 'unconscionable' stray dog law - 10/14/2024 Walmart to open own-branded veterinary practices - 10/10/2024 RACEtrack continuing education hub unreliable, state finds - 10/9/2024 See more stories » Browse by category Academia & Education Associations & Organizations Business & Economics Clinical Practice Disease Outbreaks & Information Emergencies & Disasters Employee & Professional Support Industry Legal Issues Opinion Pharmaceuticals Regulations & Legislation Research Scope of Practice State of the Profession Work & Life Audio Stories & Podcasts Also worth reading The Veterinary Idealist Veterinary Partner VetzInsight Worms & Germs Blog Friendly Reminder to Our Colleagues: TEST TEST Use of VIN content is limited to personal reference by VIN members. No portion of any VIN content may be copied or distributed without the expressed written permission of VIN. Clinicians are reminded that you are ultimately responsible for the care of your patients. Any content that concerns treatment of your cases should be deemed recommendations by colleagues for you to consider in your case management decisions. Dosages should be confirmed prior to dispensing medications unfamiliar to you. To better understand the origins and logic behind these policies, and to discuss them with your colleagues, click here. Images posted by VIN community members and displayed via VIN should not be considered of diagnostic quality and the ultimate interpretation of the images lies with the attending clinician. Suggestions, discussions and interpretation related to posted images are only that -- suggestions and recommendations which may be based upon less than diagnostic quality information. Menu/search ShowMe Hints Chat MyActivities VINdex Feedback Hi VIN VIN PublicLog out Launch VIN Chat VIN Usage Change Your Password Renew Membership Update Signature Update Credit Card × Email Document Send To Email: Oops! Please enter a valid Email address! Clear Send Cancel × Email Sent Would you like to change your VIN email? Just click here. Close REQUEST TO USE VIN Content Message Board Content IVALA 3D Content Veterinary Partner Content Cattledog Publication FEEDBACK/SUPPORT 777 W. Covell Blvd., Davis, CA 95616 Membership: news@vin.com Access Issues: Feedback@vin.com Continual Ed: CEonVIN@vin.com Veterinary Partner: Feedback@VeterinaryPartner.com Technical: Support@vin.com Content & General: Feedback@vin.com PHONE Toll Free: 800-700-4636 From UK: 01-45-222-6154 From anywhere: (1)-530-756-4881 From Australia: 02-6145-2357 FOLLOW VIN Copyright 1991-2024 Veterinary Information Network, Inc. SAID=27BD Receives FDA Emergency Use Authorization for COVID-19, Influenza A/B, RSV Combination Test - Feb 8, 2023 Products Solutions Administrator Ambulatory Surgery Center Solutions Diagnostic Accuracy and Efficiency Hazardous Drug Safety Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Medication Management Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Sepsis Management Surgical Solutions Targeted Temperature Management Vascular Access Management (VAM) Clinician Ambulatory Surgery Center Solutions Antimicrobial Resistance BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Cervical Cancer Screening Portfolio Diagnostic Accuracy and Efficiency Hazardous Drug Safety Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Medication Management Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Sepsis Management Stone Management Surgical Solutions Targeted Temperature Management Vascular Access Management (VAM) Distributor BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Drug Development Company Drug Delivery Systems Medical Device Manufacturer BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Laboratory Antimicrobial Resistance BD Original Equipment Manufacturing (OEM) Cervical Cancer Screening Portfolio Diagnostic Accuracy and Efficiency Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Sepsis Management Traditional Microbiology Pharmacy Hazardous Drug Safety Integrated Diagnostic Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Medication Management Solutions Sepsis Management Vascular Access Management (VAM) Surgery Ambulatory Surgery Center Solutions Hernia Repair Solutions Patient Safety Solutions Surgical Solutions Venous technology Knowledge Center Events Literature Training Support About BD Our Company About Us Segments Leadership Ethics and Compliance Cybersecurity at BD About Us Trust Center Bulletins and Patches Disclosure Process Helpful Resources Distributors Distributor List Unique device identifier (UDI) ESG (Environmental, Social, and Governance) Global Health Sustainability Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Social Investing Global External Funding Opportunities Investors Innovation at BD Overview BD Idea Submission Process News, Media and Blogs Policies, Guidelines and Statements Center Quality Recent Mergers and Acquisitions Response to COVID-19 Rapid COVID-19 Testing Tools and Trainings Support Offerings Suppliers Corporate Policies and Expectations Doing Business with BD Global Procurement Supplier Programs Careers United States North America Canada (FR) Canada (EN) Mexico United States South America Argentina Brasil Chile Colombia Europe Belgium (FR) Belgium (NL) Česká republika Denmark Europe Suomi France Deutschland Hebrew Hungary (EN) Hungary (HU) United Kingdom Ireland Italia Nederland Norge Polska Россия España Sverige Schweiz Türkiye United Kingdom Middle East / Africa Middle East, North Africa Africa Asia / Pacific Australia / New Zealand 中国 Greater Asia India Indonesia 日本 Korea Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Login United States North America Canada (FR) Canada (EN) Mexico United States South America Argentina Brasil Chile Colombia Europe Belgium (FR) Belgium (NL) Česká republika Denmark Europe Suomi France Deutschland Hungary (EN) Hungary (HU) United Kingdom Ireland Italia Nederland Norge Polska Россия España Sverige Schweiz Türkiye United Kingdom Middle East / Africa Middle East, North Africa Africa Asia / Pacific Australia / New Zealand 中国 India Indonesia 日本 Korea Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Login MediaRoom News and media BD blog Press releases Corporate sustainability news Executive leadership In the news Awards Media contacts BD Receives FDA Emergency Use Authorization for COVID-19, Influenza A/B, RSV Combination Test View File Download File BD-MAX-System Single Test on BD MAX™ Molecular Diagnostic System Identifies and Differentiates Multiple Respiratory Infectious Diseases FRANKLIN LAKES, N.J., Feb. 8, 2023 /PRNewswire/ -- BD (Becton, Dickinson and Company) (NYSE: BDX), a leading global medical technology company, today announced that it has received Emergency Use Authorization from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for a new molecular diagnostic combination test for SARS-CoV-2, Influenza A + B and Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) to help combat illness in the current and future respiratory virus seasons. The test, for use on the BD MAX™ Molecular Diagnostic System, uses a single nasal swab or a single nasopharyngeal swab sample to identify and distinguish if a patient has COVID-19, the flu, RSV or some combination of the three, with results available in as little as two hours. The test helps eliminate the need for multiple tests or doctor visits and can help clinicians implement the right treatment plan quickly. The co-testing approach also helps to increase testing capacity during the busy flu/RSV season and speed time to diagnosis. "While fears of a 'tripledemic' this respiratory season have largely diminished, accurately differentiating influenza and RSV from COVID-19 and providing appropriate treatment remains a challenge for our customers," said Nikos Pavlidis, vice president of Molecular Diagnostics at BD. "This diagnostic test provides the ability to identify multiple pathogens using a single sample and can quickly pinpoint the causative virus or viruses and enable clinicians to administer appropriate treatment early in the course of infection." The BD MAX™ System is already in use at thousands of hospitals and laboratories worldwide, and each unit is capable of analyzing hundreds of samples over a 24-hour period. The Respiratory Viral Panel for BD MAX™ System is an RT- PCR assay that detects and differentiates the nucleic acid of SARS-CoV-2, flu A, flu B and RSV in as little as two hours for the first result, with the simplified and automated workflow of the BD MAX™ System. Development of this combination test has been funded in whole or in part with federal funds from the Department of Health and Human Services; Office of the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response; Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, under contract number 75A50121C00025. The BD Respiratory Viral Panel assay for BD MAX™ System was CE marked under the IVD directive 98/79/EC in May of 2022. It is an important addition to the extensive number of assays available on the system across respiratory infections, sexually transmitted infections, gastrointestinal infections, women's health and health care associated infections. The BD MAX™ open system allows customers to leverage research use only (RUO) assays and user-defined protocols (UDP) to address emerging needs quickly. About BD Respiratory Viral Panel for BD MAX™ System This product has not been FDA cleared or approved but has been authorized for emergency use by FDA under EUA for use by authorized laboratories.This product has been authorized only for the detection and differentiation of nucleic acid of SARS-CoV-2, influenza A, influenza B, and respiratory syncytial virus, not for any other viruses or pathogens.The emergency use of this product is only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of in vitro diagnostics for detection and/or diagnosis of COVID-19 under Section 564(b)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb- 3(b)(1), unless the declaration is terminated or authorization is revoked sooner.About BDBD is one of the largest global medical technology companies in the world and is advancing the world of health by improving medical discovery, diagnostics and the delivery of care. The company supports the heroes on the frontlines of health care by developing innovative technology, services and solutions that help advance both clinical therapy for patients and clinical process for health care providers. BD and its 77,000 employees have a passion and commitment to help enhance the safety and efficiency of clinicians' care delivery process, enable laboratory scientists to accurately detect disease and advance researchers' capabilities to develop the next generation of diagnostics and therapeutics. BD has a presence in virtually every country and partners with organizations around the world to address some of the most challenging global health issues. By working in close collaboration with customers, BD can help enhance outcomes, lower costs, increase efficiencies, improve safety and expand access to health care. For more information on BD, please visit bd.com or connect with us on LinkedIn at www.linkedin.com/company/bd1/ and Twitter @BDandCo. Contacts: Media: Investors: Troy Kirkpatrick Francesca DeMartino VP, Public Relations SVP, Head of Investor Relations 858.617.2361 201.847.5743 troy.kirkpatrick@bd.com francesca.demartino@bd.com SOURCE BD (Becton, Dickinson and Company) Follow us Quick Links Recalls and Field Actions Careers Cybersecurity Electronic Instructions for Use Events Investors Inclusion, Diversity & Equity Literature Live Chat Support News, Media and Blogs Our Company Ethics and Compliance Support Training © 2024 BD. All rights reserved. BD and the BD Logo are trademarks of Becton, Dickinson and Company. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Contact us Cookie Preferences Privacy Statement Terms of Use Website Accessibility Your Privacy Rights Limit the use of Sensitive Personal InformationThe ubiquitination landscape of the influenza A virus polymerase | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article The ubiquitination landscape of the influenza A virus polymerase Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 11 February 2023 The ubiquitination landscape of the influenza A virus polymerase Franziska Günl ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4841-43631,2, Tim Krischuns ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2693-47011 nAff15, Julian A. Schreiber ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3847-75393,4, Lea Henschel1, Marius Wahrenburg1,5, Hannes C. A. Drexler ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8285-06446, Sebastian A. Leidel7,8, Vlad Cojocaru ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0886-34019,10,11, Guiscard Seebohm ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9303-53734, Alexander Mellmann ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0649-51852,12, Martin Schwemmle ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2972-685513,14, Stephan Ludwig ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4490-30521,2 & …Linda Brunotte ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8074-74001,2 Show authors Nature Communications volume 14, Article number: 787 (2023) Cite this article 6621 Accesses 12 Citations 181 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusProteomics AbstractDuring influenza A virus (IAV) infections, viral proteins are targeted by cellular E3 ligases for modification with ubiquitin. Here, we decipher and functionally explore the ubiquitination landscape of the IAV polymerase proteins during infection of human alveolar epithelial cells by applying mass spectrometry analysis of immuno-purified K-ε-GG (di-glycyl)-remnant-bearing peptides. We have identified 59 modified lysines across the three subunits, PB2, PB1 and PA of the viral polymerase of which 17 distinctively affect mRNA transcription, vRNA replication and the generation of recombinant viruses via non-proteolytic mechanisms. Moreover, further functional and in silico analysis indicate that ubiquitination at K578 in the PB1 thumb domain is mechanistically linked to dynamic structural transitions of the viral polymerase that are required for vRNA replication. Mutations K578A and K578R differentially affect the generation of recombinant viruses by impeding cRNA and vRNA synthesis, NP binding as well as polymerase dimerization. Collectively, our results demonstrate that the ubiquitin-mediated charge neutralization at PB1-K578 disrupts the interaction to an unstructured loop in the PB2 N-terminus that is required to coordinate polymerase dimerization and facilitate vRNA replication. This provides evidence that IAV exploits the cellular ubiquitin system to modulate the activity of the viral polymerase for viral replication. Similar content being viewed by others Adenovirus-mediated ubiquitination alters protein–RNA binding and aids viral RNA processing Article 13 July 2020 Structural insights into RNA bridging between HIV-1 Vif and antiviral factor APOBEC3G Article Open access 07 July 2023 Structure of the N-RNA/P interface indicates mode of L/P recruitment to the nucleocapsid of human metapneumovirus Article Open access 22 November 2023 IntroductionInfluenza A viruses (IAV) are respiratory pathogens of the Orthomyxoviridae family that pose a substantial threat to global health through seasonal epidemics and recurring pandemics. The IAV genome consists of eight segments of negative-sense single-strand RNA (vRNA). Each vRNA is encapsidated by multiple copies of the nucleoprotein (NP) and one copy of the trimeric viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP), composed of the subunits PB2, PB1, and PA1,2 to form viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNPs) complexes3. Transcription of viral mRNAs and replication of the viral genome is mediated by RdRPs and occurs in the cell nucleus. While incoming vRNPs are capable to directly perform mRNA synthesis following cap-snatching from host-derived pre-mRNAs4,5,6, vRNA replication depends on newly produced viral proteins and polymerase complexes. It proceeds in a primer-independent manner that involves the generation of full-length positive-sense complementary RNA (cRNA) intermediates, which serve as templates for vRNA synthesis7.Structural investigations revealed that the IAV RdRP is a flexible and highly dynamic protein complex that adopts different conformations during mRNA transcription and vRNA replication5,8. The current model for vRNA replication suggests that the transition from the transcriptase to the replicase is promoted by the interaction with a second viral polymerase forming an asymmetric dimer9,10. Moreover, the formation of the asymmetric dimer facilitates encapsidation of the nascent cRNA strand. In the second step of genome replication, initiation of vRNA synthesis from cRNA templates requires formation of a symmetric polymerase dimer through interaction with a trans-activating polymerase11,12. To maintain the optimal balance between mRNA transcription and vRNA replication during the viral life cycle chronologic assembly of the two dimers is critical and is suggested to be influenced by viral as well as cellular factors. In particular, host-mediated post-translational modifications (PTM) of viral proteins were proposed as dynamic molecular switches to fine-tune the actions of the RdRP13,14. Indeed, phosphorylation15,16,17,18,19, ADP-ribosylation or acetylation19,20,21 as well as linkage of ubiquitin (UB)22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31 and ubiquitin-like modifiers (UBL), such as SUMO 1–332,33, NEDD834, or ISG1535 to the polymerase subunits and NP have been reported. Among these modifiers, ubiquitination is the most abundant in human cells and regulates the functionality and longevity of a wide range of proteins and has been described for all subunits of the IAV RdRP with both pro- and antiviral outcomes. Conjugation of PTMs such as UB confers several effects. It introduces a binding surface for other UBL-binding proteins, but can also shield protein binding sites on the modified protein. In addition, UB transfers biological signals, e.g., the degradation by the cellular proteasome or translocation to a different cellular compartment. A less reported consequence of UB-linkage is the neutralization of the positive charge in the side chain of the acceptor lysine by formation of the dipeptide bond, which can result in structural alterations and affect interactions with other proteins36. Until today, the biological impact of site-specific modifications in the IAV polymerase proteins for the processes of viral mRNA transcription and genome replication has remained largely unknown.In this study, we have performed mass spectrometry (MS) analyses of immuno-selected, K-ε-GG-(di-glycyl)-enriched viral proteins purified from infected human lung epithelial cells to unravel the ubiquitination landscape of the IAV polymerase during infection. We have identified 59 modified lysines across the subunits of the IAV RdRP, with UB being the most abundant UBL. Mutational analysis and generation of recombinant viruses by reverse genetics reveal that ubiquitination at position PB1-K578 in the PB1-thumb domain regulates the spatio-temporal positioning of an unstructured N-terminal loop in the PB2 subunit and thereby participates in the coordination of polymerase dimerization, NP binding and vRNA replication.ResultsUnraveling the ubiquitination landscape of the IAV polymerase during infectionWestern blot analysis of co-precipitated strep-tagged RdRP subunits, PB2, PB1, and PA, with co-expressed UBLs revealed abundant UB modifications on all three subunits (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1), which is in line with previous reports27. In contrast, NEDD8 was only detected on PA, while ISG15 was absent for all three subunits (Fig. 1b, c).Fig. 1: Identification of site-specific UB modifications in the IAV polymerase.a–c Western blot analysis of ubiquitin (UB), NEDD8 and ISG15 modification of the IAV polymerase subunits. A549 (UB) or HEK293-T (NEDD8, ISG15) were transfected with expression plasmids for strep-tagged polymerase subunits (PB2, PB1, or PA), respectively, together with plasmids for the expression of ubiquitin-like modifiers (UBLs) bearing an HA- or His-tag. UBL-modified polymerase subunits were precipitated under denaturing conditions using Strep-Tactin® bound sepharose beads. UBL modification was detected by western blot using the indicated antibodies. Representative blots of three independent experiments are shown. MW, molecular weight marker. d Experimental outline for the identification of di-glycylated lysines using a di-glycyl-specific immunoselection coupled to mass spectrometry analysis 5 h post infection (p.i). MOI, multiplicity of infection. This illustration was created with biorender. e Sequence alignment of UB/UBLs. The di-glycyl motif is highlighted in yellow, the N-terminal amino acid, which determines trypsin cleavage, is highlighted in gray. f–h Conservation analysis of the identified UBL acceptor lysines in PB2, PB1, and PA. PB2-K113, -K627; PB1-K278, -K586 are not depicted. PB2, PB1, and PA sequences from human, swine, and avian IAV isolates were downloaded from NCBI (PB1 and PB2: 09/15/2017; PA: 10/01/2017) and analyzed for sequence identity. Relative frequency of lysines at the respective position in PB2 (f), PB1 (g), and PA (h) is depicted. In case of a lysine frequency below 75%, the most abundant AA is shown (R = Arginine). Source data are provided as a Source data file.Full size imageTo determine the specific location of the UB/UBL-modified lysines within the IAV polymerase during the early phase of the viral infection cycle in human alveolar epithelial cells, we infected A549 cells with the human IAV strain A/WSN/1933 (H1N1, WSN) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20 for 5 h, followed by immunoselection of trypsin digested peptides harboring di-glycyl remnants and MS analysis (Fig. 1d, e).In total, we identified 59 lysines with di-glycyl remnants distributed across all three subunits of the polymerase, of which 22 were located in PA and PB2, each, and 15 in PB1 (Table 1). The majority of the modified lysines are highly conserved among IAV strains from birds, swine and humans (Fig. 1f–h). To assess surface accessibility and spatial distribution of the modified lysines within the described conformational states, we generated sequence-adapted three-dimensional structure models of the trimeric WSN RdRP bound to promoters of vRNA (Fig. 2a) or cRNA (Fig. 2b) by homology modeling8,9,11,37. The majority of the modified lysines were exposed on the surface of the polymerase trimer in at least one of the conformations, suggesting that modification by E3 ligases can occur in the context of the individual proteins as well as the active polymerase trimer (summarized in Table 1). In PB1 some lysines were located within the inaccessible hydrophobic core, suggesting that modification occurred prior to the assembly of the polymerase trimer. Importantly, many lysines were located in functionally described subdomains of the polymerase (Fig. 2c). In PB2, modified lysines resided in two main clusters: the N-terminus, which extends to the N2 domain, and the combined C-terminal 627-NLD domain. Both regions are crucial for interactions with NP, PA, and PB138,39,40,41,42,43,44,45. Moreover, some modified lysines were located in regions implicated in polymerase dimerization9,11. Only three modified lysines were detected in the flexible and exposed mid, cap-binding (CapB), and linker domains. Several modified lysines were embedded in nuclear localization signals (NLS) or mediated interaction with the host nuclear import protein importin-α, suggesting a putative function for UB/UBL modifications in nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of PB2 proteins and the RdRP complex46,47.Table 1 Modified lysines in the IAV polymeraseFull size tableFig. 2: UB-modified lysines reside in functional domains of the IAV polymerase.a, b 3D structural models of a WSN-adapted heterotrimeric IAV polymerase bound to vRNA (adapted from PDB: 4WSB; a) or cRNA (adapted from PDB: 5EPI; b) created by comparative homology modeling. Positions of lysines with diglycyl remnants are depicted in violet (PB2, yellow, upper panel), green (PA, violet, middle panel), and magenta (PB1, turquoise, lower panel). c Linear models of PB2 (upper panel), PA (middle panel), and PB1 (lower panel) depicting the location of the identified di-glycylated lysines (K-ε-GG position) in previously described functional domains. Boundaries of functional domains (gray boxes) are depicted in the upper lane (#AA). Interaction sites to viral proteins PA (violet), PB1 (light green), PB2 (orange), NP (dark orange), and NEP (brown) and the cellular proteins pol-II (dark green), importin (bright orange), and ANP32A (pink) are included. RNA interaction sites are depicted as follows: mRNA (gray) vRNA (white boxes) or cRNA (black boxes) and the 5′Cap-structures of cellular mRNAs (bright green boxes). Other functional motives include the catalytic domains of the polymerase in PB1 (light pink), NLS (violet), and the priming loop (dark green).Full size imageIn PA, seven di-glycyl-carrying lysines resided in the N-terminal endonuclease domain (Fig. 2c, middle panel), also including the catalytic residue K13448,49,50. Interestingly, four lysines directly faced toward the PB2-CapB domain in the transcriptase conformation of the trimeric polymerase, including K102 and K104, which were reported to interact with the 5′-capped mRNA-primer during transcription50, suggesting that the cap-snatching process is a putative target for regulation by UB/UBL modification. Three modified residues were located in the PA linker region. Within the PA C-terminus three modified lysines were found in the region involved in the formation of the symmetric dimer9,11,12 and six within the interaction site to the cellular RNA polymerase II (pol-II)42,51. In both, PA and PB1, several modified lysines were located in close proximity to the binding pocket of the 5′ hook of the vRNA and cRNA templates42,52,53,54,55.The central polymerase subunit PB1 exhibited the lowest number of modified lysines in our analysis. Furthermore, only 7 out of 15 lysines were surface exposed, while the rest was located in the hydrophobic core or covered by the other subunits within the trimeric complex (Fig. 2a, b, lower panel). Residue K480 is located at the rim of the NTP tunnel, where it has been shown to participate in NTP binding during RNA synthesis42,55. K578 resides in the PB1 thumb domain, which is a highly flexible subdomain that is part of the vRNA template exit tunnel5. In addition, it directly points toward the PB2-N1-domain and is located in close proximity to the interface of the symmetric dimer as well as the secondary binding site of the cRNA and vRNA 3′ end5,11,56. In summary, our results provide the first comprehensive map of UB/UBL modifications that are acquired across all subunits of the IAV viral polymerase at 5 h p.i. of human lung epithelial cells.Substitution of modified lysines impacts polymerase functionsTo assess the functional impact of the site-specific modifications identified in our analysis, we substituted each lysine with a non-charged alanine (A) or a positively charged arginine (R) and determined polymerase activity (Fig. 3a), intracellular localization and generation of infectious recombinant viruses (Fig. 3b). Both mutations lead to the loss of the UB/UBL acceptor function but either neutralize (A) or retain (R) the positive charge of the naturally encoded lysine.Fig. 3: Mutational screen of modified lysines reveals distinct effects on mRNA transcription and vRNA replication.a Schematic of the polymerase reconstitution assay. Cells are co-transfected with plasmids for PB2, PB1, PA, and NP together with a firefly luciferase-encoding vRNA minigenome under control of the pol-I promoter and a Renilla luciferase under control of the pol-II promoter. FF activity correlates with the activity of the viral polymerase. Renilla activity serves as an internal transfection control. b Generation of recombinant influenza viruses. Cells are co-transfected with 8 bi-directional pHW2000 plasmids encoding the viral genome segments. Viral mRNA and vRNA is generated from pol-II and pol-I promoters, respectively. Illustrations created with biorender. c–e Polymerase reconstitution assay with A/R-substitutions of the modified lysines in PB2 (c), PA (d), and PB1 (e). Relative FF activities are presented as the mean percentage activity using the wild type (WT) polymerase (±SEM), n = 3 independent biological replicates. P values < 0.05 compared to WT from Dunnett’s multiple comparison one-way ANOVA test are indicated. Success (+) or failure (−) to generate recombinant viruses is depicted below. Virus rescue was considered negative if three independent rescue attempts failed. Sites located in functional domains (white), interaction regions with RNA templates (light red), or viral/host proteins (gray) are highlighted. f–h Quantification of FF mRNA and cRNA levels from the polymerase reconstitution assay for mutations in PB2 (f), PA (g), or PB1 (h) using qRT-PCR using segment and RNA species-specific primers. Values are depicted as mean relative to WT (±SEM), n = 3 independent biological replicates. GAPDH served as housekeeping control. P values < 0.05 compared to WT from Dunnett’s multiple comparison two-way ANOVA are indicated. i–k Viral titers after rescue (i) or passaging (j, k), n = 3 independent biological replicates (±SEM). Viral titers were determined 48 h p.i. as plaque forming units (PFU) per ml. l–n Immunofluorescence of WT or mutated versions of PB2 (l), PA individually (m), or in combination with HA-tagged PB1 (n)74. 24 h post transfection A549 cells were fixed and analyzed using the indicated antibodies. Cell nuclei were visualized using DAPI. Representative cells from one experiment are shown. Scale bar = 10 µm.Full size imageOverall, introduction of A was tolerated at 22 positions without affecting the polymerase activity (Supplementary Fig. 2a–c). At 16 sites, A mutations significantly changed the polymerase activity, however, this effect was reverted by the R mutation, which suggests that it was the positive charge of the lysine rather than the presence of the UB/UBL that determined its role for polymerase activity (Supplementary Fig. 2d–f, Supplementary Table 1). For the 17 remaining positions, A and R substitution significantly up- or down-regulated the polymerase activity, which corroborated their function as UB/UBL acceptor sites and suggested a regulatory role of the modification on the activity of the viral polymerase. This was further supported by the fact that these lysines are located within binding regions to NP, the other polymerase subunits and pol-II as well as the NLS and RNA binding motifs, which are essential domains for polymerase activity (Fig. 3c–e). Notably, previously reported NEDD8 and UB acceptor sites in PB2, such as K69934 and K48231, respectively, were also among the identified regulatory lysines. Among all three subunits, we identified only two positions that indicated an antiviral effect of the UB/UBL modifications. This included PB2-K157 located in the mRNA exit tunnel and PB1-K635 in the thumb domain. Both mutations demonstrated increased polymerase activity and resulted in the generation of stable recombinant viruses (Fig. 3c, e). Substitution of PA-K22 with A or R resulted in diverging effects on polymerase activity. While PA-K22R reduced polymerase activity, the introduction of A led to a strong increase to more than 250%. With regard to its location in a hinge region of the PA endonuclease domain and an interaction site with PB157 (Supplementary Fig. 2j, Supplementary Table 1), this could suggest, that UB/UBL-mediated neutralization at PA-K22 affects mRNA transcription through structural alterations. Mutations at eight positions abrogated or reduced the polymerase activity but nevertheless gave rise to viable recombinant viruses (Fig. 3c–e, bottom panels, Table 1). We speculated that this discrepancy was facilitated by residual vRNA replication. To confirm this hypothesis, we determined synthesis of the different viral RNA species with strand-specific qRT-PCRs for mRNA and cRNA58. Indeed, all mutations ablated mRNA transcription but retained at least 40% cRNA synthesis activity (Fig. 3f–h). In the case of PB1-K360A cRNA synthesis was even upregulated to more than 250% compared to the wild-type (WT) polymerase (Fig. 3h). This indicates that UB/UBL modifications at these positions are particularly required for mRNA transcription. Residue PA-K536 resides within a putative RNA template binding groove53,54. Both the introduction of A and R were not stable but caused immediate reversion to K536 during virus rescue, demonstrating a strong selection pressure for lysine. We speculate that neither a constantly neutral nor a positively charged residue is tolerated at this position and that at some point during viral replication, the positive charge of PA-K536 needs to be neutralized, hypothetically by the conjugation of UB/UBL.Positions in domains with catalytic activity, such as the endonuclease in PA (K134) and the polymerase catalytic cavity in PB1 (K229, K347, K471) were in general highly sensitive to substitution with A or R leading to loss of polymerase activity and lack of recombinant virus generation despite robust protein expression (Fig. 3d, e, Supplementary Fig. 2h, i). PB2-K617, located in a putative NP binding region41,59, was likewise sensitive to mutation, pointing towards a pro-viral function of the UB/UBL modification (Fig. 3c).The mutations PB2-K699R and PA-K615A did not support the generation of recombinant viruses despite increased polymerase activity and WT-like levels of cRNA synthesis activity (Fig. 3c, d, f, g), suggesting a supportive function of the modification for other steps in the viral life cycle, which might be hindered by the loss of the modification. In the case of PB1-K578, A and R mutations both strongly elevated the polymerase activity (Fig. 3e). However, while K578A gave rise to stable recombinant virus, rescue with K578R resulted in infectious plaques in only one out of three experiments (Fig. 3i), indicating that substitution of K578 with a neutral or constantly positive charged residue differentially affects the viral polymerase. The low stability of K578R was further corroborated by reduced hemagglutination inhibition (HI) titers and low viral titers reaching less than 104 PFU/ml after virus rescue in R1 (Fig. 3i and Supplementary Fig. 2k). Nevertheless, virus titers increased to comparable levels of the WT virus after only one additional passage of the rescue supernatant, indicating either reversion of the mutation or introduction of compensatory mutations. In contrast, PB1-K578A did not show reduced viral and HI titers for up to 5 passages after rescue (Fig. 3j, Supplementary Fig. 2l).Some mutations also affected the intracellular localization of the polymerase subunits. We observed an increased cytoplasmic localization of PB2-K482R and PB2-K699R (Fig. 3l), which are both known to be involved in nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of PB246,60. In addition, PA-K635A resulted in an increased translocation of PA into the nucleus (Fig. 3m, n). In summary, our functional analysis revealed that host-derived site-specific UB/UBL modifications in the polymerase subunits confer both positive and negative effects on the activities of the viral polymerase. Furthermore, our results provide evidence that several modifications distinctively impact viral mRNA transcription or vRNA replication.PB1-K578 is an acceptor site for UB and is highly conserved among influenza virusesThe different effects of A/R mutations of K578 on viral rescue prompted us to investigate this UB/UBL acceptor site in more detail. We first elucidated whether K578 is modified by UB. Co-expression of wild-type PB1 and K578A with a UB-expressing plasmid resulted in significantly reduced UB levels (~70%) for PB1-K578A despite 14 other UB sites detected in the MS screen (Fig. 4a), which suggested that PB1-K578 represents a major UB target site in PB1. Treatment with the UB-specific peptidase USP2 removed residual UB from both WT and mutant PB1. To obtain structural insights on how UB modification of PB1-K578 affects the polymerase activity, we analyzed the structural environment within the WSN-adapted 3D models of the IAV WT polymerase. PB1-K578 resides in a surface exposed α-helix within the PB1 thumb domain that is part of a positively charged patch constituted of several positively charged residues in PB1 (R571, R572) and PB2 (R101). In the modeled structure, PB1-K578 is directly oriented towards the negatively charged residue PB2-E72, which resides at the tip of a mostly unstructured and flexible loop in the PB2-N1 domain (AA 61–82), suggesting a direct charge-dependent communication between both residues (Fig. 4b). The PB2 loop was described before to participate in dimerization of the viral polymerase trimer11,12. Particularly, residues PB2-T76 and R70 were shown to interact with PA-D347 of the second polymerase (Fig. 4c). In addition, alanine substitution of the triplet PB2-N71-E72-Q73 in the PB2 loop resulted in loss of polymerase activity and dimerization suggesting a crucial role of this loop for viral RNA synthesis11,12.Fig. 4: PB1-K578 is ubiquitinated and interacts with a loop in the PB2 N-terminus.a A549 cells were co-transfected with strep-tagged PB1 or PB1-K578A and HA-tagged UB. UB-modified PB1 subunits were strep-purified using denaturing conditions and analyzed by western blot. For de-ubiquitination, bound PB1 constructs were treated with USP2. Co-precipitated UB-HA levels were quantified and presented as the mean fold change of WT (±SEM), n = 4 independent biological replicates. P values compared to WT from Welch’s corrected two-tailed t-test are indicated. b, c Illustration of PB1-K578 in the 3D structures of the WSN polymerase (vRNA-bound conformation; b) and the 3D structure of the symmetric dimer of the H3N2 polymerase (PDB: 6QNW; c), showing the K578 containing PB1-helix (cyan), the flexible loop in the PB2 N-terminus (yellow) harboring PB2-E72 and the helix in the PA C-terminus that participates in dimer formation. Distances between PB1-K578 and PB2-E72 are indicated in Angstrom (Å). Amino acids involved in the dimer interface are indicated. Created with ChimeraX. d Mean lifetime of ionic interactions with PB2-E72 for 100 ns simulations, n = 4 independent biological replicates for each condition (±SEM). P values < 0.05 compared to WT from Welch’s corrected two-tailed t-test are indicated. e, f RMSD distribution of PB2-E72 (e) and PB2-Q73 (f) for WT, K578R and K578A simulations. Each 100 ns simulation generated 1000 RMSD values leading to a total number of 4000 values for each condition. Equal bin sizes with 0.5 Å steps were used for of each histogram. g RMSF values of PB2 residues (±SEM). Significance of mean differences was analyzed by Welch corrected two-sided t-test, n = 4 independent experiments. P values are summarized in Supplementary Table 2. Source data are provided as a Source data file.Full size imageThe amino acid sequences of the PB1 helix and the PB2 loop are both highly conserved among IAV strains including natural isolates from human, swine and avian hosts (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b). K578, is the predominant amino acid in PB1 sequences derived from human (98.82%), avian (99.26%), and swine (75.18%) isolates (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Only 0.03% of avian IAV strains contained A578, which was not present in human and swine IAV isolates, suggesting low evolutionary stability in nature. Interestingly, of the analyzed swine PB1 sequences 12.47% encoded for R578 and 12% for S578, a putative acceptor site for phosphorylation. To assess the functional conservation of PB1-K578 we substituted PB1-K578 with A and R in PB1 of IAV strains PR8 (H1N1) and SC35M (H7N7), which resulted in enhanced polymerase activity and resembled the results of the WSN RdRP (Supplementary Fig. 3d). Furthermore, we identified structural resemblance of the PB1-PB2 interface in the polymerases of influenza B and C as well as bat influenza viruses (Supplementary Fig. 3e–g). Taken together, these results reveal that K578 is a highly conserved UB acceptor site in the PB1 subunit of IAV.Mutation of PB1-K578 remodels the PB1-PB2 interface by charge-dependent rearrangement of a flexible N-terminal PB2 loopTo predict how UB-mediated charge neutralization or a constant positive charge at K578 would affect the structural integrity and dynamic of the putative PB1-PB2 interaction site, we performed extended molecular dynamic (MD) simulations of 100 ns using WSN-adapted 3D models of the IAV WT polymerase in comparison to models harboring K578A and K578R (n = 4 for each condition). Simulations were restricted to an area of 45 Å around the PB1-PB2 interface. The analysis resembled that four amino acids are involved in ionic interactions with PB2-E72, including PB1-R571, PB1-R572, PB1-K578, and PB2-R101, of which K578 represents the only UB acceptor site allowing for charge neutralization. Comparing the lifetime of ionic interactions with one of these residues revealed that charge deletion in K578A eliminates PB2-E72 exerted ionic interactions (2.8 ± 2.8%, SEM, n = 4, p value 0.0076, Fig. 4d), whereas for K578R simulations, lifetime of PB2-E72 ionic interactions (48.3 ± 14.9%) was not significantly different (p-value 0.7289) to lifetime evaluated for WT simulations (42.2 ± 7.2%). Because alteration of interactions can result in reorientation of the involved residues, we analyzed the change of residue position of PB2-E72 in dependence of either WT, K578A, or K578R over the complete simulation time by calculating the root mean square deviation (RMSD) every 0.1 ns (4000 values for each condition). However, while this did not reveal a significant shift in a certain mean position of PB2-E72 (WT: 3.160 ± 0.21, K578R: 3.410 ± 0.39, K578A: 4.196 ± 0.58), RMSD distribution analyses demonstrated clear differences for both mutants, indicating that K578A strongly increased the degree of mobility for PB2-E72, since the residue is able to occupy positions with RMSD values of more than 6 Å compared to the initial structure (Fig. 4e). In comparison to the WT simulations, RMSD distribution of PB2-E72 for K578R showed a second peak, indicating the presence of an additional favored position of E72. Interestingly, we observed that mutation K578R also heavily affected the RMSD distribution of the adjacent residue PB2-Q73 (Fig. 4f). While RMSD values for WT and K578A are similar distributed showing the highest peak around 4.5 (K578A) to 5 Å (WT), K578R resulted in a clear shift of the highest peak to 3.25 Å, indicating a different spatial stabilization of Q73 in a conformation different from the conformation observed for WT.Loss of the charge-dependent interactions (K578A) also significantly increased the flexibility (root mean square fluctuation, RMSF) of residues located at a proximal region of the PB2 loop, spanning AA 63–68, while residues at a distal region of AA 78–82 where not affected (Fig. 4g, Supplementary Table 2). This uneven increment of flexibility could influence the spatial structure of the complete loop. Contrary to K578A, K578R showed no significant RMSF alterations in comparison to WT.To analyze whether these predictions are supported in the polymerase reconstitution assay, we mutated additional residues in the positive interaction surface (PB2-R101, R571, R572) as well as the PB2 loop (PB2-E72 and Q73). This demonstrated that charge neutralization of PB2-R101A as well as PB2-E72 increased the polymerase activity similar to K578A (Supplementary Fig. 3h, i). In contrast, PB1-K571A resulted in a mild reduction while PB1-K572A and PB2-Q73A abrogated the polymerase activity, suggesting additional interactions with other residues that affect the polymerase activity by a different mechanism of action.Taken together, the results of the dynamic structure simulations support the previous observation that PB2-E72 is coordinated by a positively charged interaction surface involving PB1-K578 and that mutations PB1-K578A/R both affect the PB1-PB2 interface in a different manner. Neutralization of PB1-K578 interrupted the interaction to PB2-E72 (PB1-K578A) leading to increased flexibility in the proximal part of the PB2 loop. In contrast, K578R preserved the positively charged surface and did not impact the flexibility of the loop compared to WT but instead conferred pronounced repositioning and stabilization of the neighboring residue PB2-Q73. Presumably, this stable position of the PB2 loop is not compatible with the dynamic structural rearrangements in the viral polymerase that are required for viral replication. These results suggest that UB modification of K578 promotes viral replication by a charge-dependent structural rearrangement of the PB1-PB2 interface that may also affect formation of the symmetric dimer.PB1-K578R aborts vRNA replication during (multicycle) infectionIn contrast to results from the polymerase reconstitution assay, which did not show a negative effect of K578R on polymerase activity, the inefficient viral rescues suggested that a constant positive charge at position PB1-578 is not tolerated during viral replication and poses a strong selection pressure for reversion or alternative mutations. Indeed, deep sequencing of purified infectious and non-infectious virus particles from the supernatants after the rescue experiments revealed a high prevalence of adenines at nucleotide positions 1732–1734 in R1, demonstrating a high frequency of reversion from the mutated 578R to the natural K (Fig. 5a). In contrast, in non-infectious particles from replicates R2 and R3 the distribution of nucleotides at these positions was more heterogeneous, with 0 and 1% adenines at the first position in R2 and R3, respectively, suggesting absence or very low reversion to 578 K. Of note, R2 and R3 contained fractions encoding for 578 A or Q, but nevertheless failed to produce infectious virus also after additional passaging. Compensatory mutations in the polymerase or other genes were not observed.Fig. 5: Mutation of PB1-K578 affects cRNP stabilization and vRNA synthesis.a, b Detection of packaged vRNA segments isolated from released virus particles in the supernatants of the rescue experiments at 48 h p.t. vRNA segments were amplified with segment-specific primers, separated on 2% agarose gel (b). Gels from all three replicates of K578R and representative gels of three replicates (R) with consistent results are shown for WT and PB1-K578A. vRNA was analyzed using deep sequencing. Percentage of nucleotides encoded at position 1732–34 encoding for K578 (a). c–e Analysis of cRNA stabilization, cRNA and vRNA synthesis. HEK293-T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing NP, PB2, PA, inactive PB1 [PB1a] (D445A/D446A62,100; c) or active PB1 (d, e). At 24 h p.t., cells were infected with WT WSN virus (MOI: 5) and cultured in infection medium with cycloheximide (CHX). At 6 h p.i. cRNA (c, d) or vRNA levels (e) of the NA segment were assessed using strand-specific RT-PCR and are shown as mean n-fold of WT (±SEM), n = 6 independent biological replicates. P values < 0.05 compared to WT from Dunnett’s multiple comparison one-way ANOVA-test are indicated. f, g Accumulation of vRNA segments in HEK293-T cells co-transfected with pHW2000 plasmids at the indicated time points. vRNA levels were quantified using segment-specific primers for RT-PCR and presented as the mean n-fold of WT (±SEM), n = 3 independent biological replicates. Cellular GAPDH mRNA levels were used as housekeeping control. P values < 0.05 compared to WT from Šidák’s corrected multiple comparison two-way ANOVA test are indicated. Source data are provided as a Source data file.Full size imageAnalyses of the abundance of the individual vRNA segments within virus particles from rescue supernatants of PB1-K578R, PB1-K578A and the WT virus demonstrated that all eight vRNA segments were present in viral particles from the rescues giving rise to viable virus (Fig. 5b). In contrast, the non-infectious viral particles from R2 and R3 of the PB1-K578R rescue contained incomplete viral genomes, implying that defective vRNA replication accounts for the generation of non-infectious virus particles in these replicates.To determine the step of vRNA replication that was affected by K578R, we next compared the ability of reconstituted WT and mutant polymerase complexes to stabilize and transcribe a cRNA template provided by viral infection. Cells were first transfected with plasmids expressing PB2, inactive PB1 (PB1a), PA, and NP for 24 h followed by infection with WT virus in presence of cycloheximide (CHX) to inhibit translation of viral proteins. Both, K578A and K578R did not differ in cRNA stabilizing activity compared to the WT polymerase (Fig. 5c). However, pre-transfection with plasmids for the assembly of an active polymerase complex resulted in significantly reduced cRNA levels for both K578A and K578R (Fig. 5d). In addition, we observed that the neutral K578A polymerase produced significantly lower levels of vRNA compared to the WT as well as K578R polymerase, suggesting less efficient cRNA to vRNA synthesis (Fig. 5e). These results reveal that both mutations hamper a step proceeding cRNA stabilization and that neither a constant positive nor a neutral charged residue at this position supports the synthesis of similar high cRNA levels compared to the WT polymerase, suggesting that UB-mediated charge neutralization of PB1-K578 is required to occur with distinct timing in the infected cell for optimal vRNA levels.Since these results did not unravel the specific defect of the K578R mutant to generate viable virus, we next compared the amounts of segment-specific vRNAs during virus rescue directly from the transfected HEK293-T cells at 16 h and 48 h post transfection (p.t.) of the 8 rescue plasmids. This demonstrated significantly higher levels of 7 vRNA segments (excluding the HA encoding segment) for the K578R mutant compared to the WT at 16 h p.t. (Fig. 5f). However, this advantage was lost at 48 h p.t. when vRNA levels of all segments were strongly reduced compared to the WT (Fig. 5g), indicating that the defect in vRNA replication of the PB1-K578R harboring polymerase involves the incoming vRNP and is therefore detrimental in infected rather than transfected cells.The charge at PB1-K587 modulates NP binding and polymerase dimerizationAccumulating evidence suggests that vRNA replication relies on polymerase dimerization as well as the interaction with free NP to encapsidate newly produced cRNAs and vRNAs9,11,61,62,63,64. Based on the previous results, we speculated that the alteration in vRNA synthesis by mutation of PB1-K578 could underlie changes in NP binding or polymerase dimerization.Co-immunoprecipitation of strep-tagged NP with the viral polymerase subunits showed that PB2 and to a minor extent also PB1 directly interacted with NP, while there was no direct interaction with PA (Supplementary Fig. 4a). We further investigated whether the PB1-NP interaction was affected by mutations K578A or K578R but did not find a difference, suggesting absence of a direct interaction at this residue (Supplementary Fig. 4b). In the next step we co-expressed the trimeric polymerase using wild type PB1 or PB1 harboring mutations at PB1–578 with strep-tagged NP and used the PA subunit as a readout for interaction. This demonstrated that PB1-K578A significantly destabilized the interaction between the polymerase and NP (Fig. 6a). In the presence of viral RNA, however, binding of PB1-K578A to NP was not reduced (Fig. 6b), while PB1-K578R did not affect NP interaction in either setting. Collectively, these results suggest, that UB-mediated charge neutralization of PB1-K578 reduces NP binding to the RNA-free trimeric IAV polymerase but not to the vRNP-bound polymerase.Fig. 6: Mutation of PB1-K578 affects the binding of free polymerase to NP and polymerase dimerization.a, b Detection of NP binding to trimeric polymerase by co-affinity precipitation. Cells were transfected with PB1, PB2, HA-tagged PA, strep-tagged NP (a) and a firefly-encoding vRNA reporter (b) followed by strep-purification 24 h p.t. Co-precipitated proteins were detected by western blot. c Polymerase dimerization assessed by co-affinity precipitation. Cells were transfected with PB1, PB2 and both HA- and strep-tagged PA. 24 h p.t. the polymerase components bound to strep-tagged PA were purified. Co-precipitated proteins were detected by western blot. (Input Strep-PA signals derive from a blot analyzed in parallel). Quantification of the interaction is shown below the panels. Levels of HA-tagged PA were normalized to strep-tagged NP (a, b) or strep-tagged PA (c) and depicted below as the mean n-fold of WT (±SEM). The number of independent biological replicates (n) is provided in the figure. P values < 0.05 compared to WT from Dunnett’s multiple comparison one-way ANOVA are indicated. Source data are provided as a Source data file. d Model depicting the biological function of PB1-K578 ubiquitination during vRNA replication. Incoming vRNPs perform viral mRNA transcription for viral protein expression including the viral polymerase proteins and NP. A subpopulation of newly synthesized trimeric polymerase complexes acquires ubiquitination at PB1-K578 (cyan polymerase complexes with UB in yellow) which disrupts the interaction between PB1-K578 and the loop in the PB2-N1 domain, prevents early formation of the symmetric dimer and reduces the affinity to NP. The PB1-K578 ubiquitinated polymerase interacts with the vRNP-bound polymerase to form the ANP32A-stabilized asymmetric dimer for cRNA synthesis and encapsidation. For vRNA synthesis from the cRNA template, a non-ubiquitinated polymerase (violet polymerase complexes) interacts with the cRNP-associated polymerase under formation of the symmetric dimer. Ultimately, progeny vRNPs may perform secondary mRNA transcription, further rounds of vRNA replication or get exported out of the nucleus for progeny virion assembly. Substitution of the UB-acceptor site PB1-K578 with both alanine and arginine affects vRNA replication (right panel). While PB1-K578A retains the pool of free polymerases, PB1-K578 aborts progression of vRNA replication due to a depletion of free polymerases.Full size imageFinally, we analyzed whether the dimerization between two heterologous polymerase trimers was affected by PB1-K578A/R mutations and used the previously described dimerization mutant PB2-71–73 as a positive control for reduced formation of the symmetric dimer12. Co-expression of strep-PA and HA-PA together with the other subunits and subsequent strep-pull down resulted in reduced levels of co-precipitated HA-PA for PB1-K578A but not for PB1-K578R, suggesting that UB-mediated charge neutralization also reduces formation of the symmetric polymerase dimer (Fig. 6c). Taken together, these results indicate that UB modification of PB1-K578 modulates assembly of the symmetric polymerase dimer and binding to NP.DiscussionPost translational modifications provide a crucial regulatory layer to control the structure and function of viral proteins as well as their intracellular location and interaction to other proteins. Thereby, PTMs can serve as dynamic molecular switches to coordinate the different steps of viral replication.Here, we unraveled the first comprehensive landscape of site-specific ubiquitin modification in the IAV viral polymerase during infection. The combination of di-glycyl-targeted peptide enrichment and MS analysis resulted in the identification of 59 UBL-modified lysines across all three subunits of the polymerase, the majority of which have not been described nor functionally characterized before. Most lysines are highly conserved in IAV isolates from humans, birds, and pigs and reside within functionally and structurally important regions, emphasizing their putative impact on viral replication. Although di-glycyl remnants derive from different UBL modifiers, we demonstrate that ubiquitin is the most abundantly detected modification in the viral polymerase, which is consistent with earlier reports27,34. Several other groups reported site-specific UB/UBL modifications in the IAV polymerase and NP with effects on viral replication. However, these effects were commonly attributed to proteasomal degradation or destabilization of the modified viral proteins, while specific effects on the polymerase functions were not reported22,28,34. Our work provides a new perspective on UB/UBL modifications of the IAV polymerase and demonstrates that such modifications confer site-specific effects on the activity of the viral polymerase and the generation of recombinant viruses through non-proteolytic mechanisms, which substantiates that IAV exploits the cellular UB/UBL system to optimize viral replication. We describe no less than 17 UB/UBL acceptor sites in the viral polymerase, which positively or negatively affect the activity of the viral polymerase on the level of intracellular localization, mRNA transcription, vRNA replication, and generation of recombinant viruses upon substitution with A and R. Interestingly, we found that several mutations resulted in the abrogation of mRNA transcription, however, with minor effects on cRNA synthesis. This provides strong evidence for a broad spectrum of functional roles of site-specific ubiquitination in the temporal coordination of both processes and emphasizes that the regulatory impact of host-derived and site-specific UB modifications on the viral polymerase activity exceeds our current understanding and thus requires further investigation.In addition to the description of new ubiquitination sites within the IAV polymerase and their functional characterization, we provide compelling evidence that the UB acceptor site PB1-K578 plays a crucial role for mRNA transcription and vRNA replication. The importance of K578 was revealed by mutational substitution with A and R, which both abrogate UB-modification but resemble UB-mediated charge neutralization or the constant positive charge of a non-modified lysine, respectively. According to the current model for mRNA transcription5, we speculate that the increased polymerase activity of the PB1-K578A/R mutants observed in the reconstitution assays (Fig. 3e) derives from an altered repositioning of the PB1 thumb domain and the PB2-N1 domain, which alleviates blockage of the template exit channel by PB2 (AA 80–90) in the pre-initiation complex of the transcriptase and thereby promotes mRNA elongation.Dynamic molecular structure modeling predicted that PB1-K578A negatively affects the integrity of a positively charged interaction surface constituted by PB1-R571, R572, K578, and PB2-101, leading to the spatial reorientation of the entire N-terminal PB2 loop by weakening the charge-dependent interactions to residue PB2-E72 and subsequently influencing spatial positioning of PB2-Q73. Consequently, we found that PB1-K578A had a reduced affinity to NP in the context of the RNA-free polymerase and demonstrated reduced formation of the symmetric dimer. Importantly, this was accompanied by significantly reduced cRNA and vRNA synthesis activity, while cRNA stabilization was not affected. Nevertheless, PB1-K578A supported rescue of a stable recombinant virus. In combination with the defect of the PB1-K578R mutant to rescue a stable virus but instead enforcing the rapid reversion to the natural lysine, as well as the pronounced defect in vRNA replication, our data emphasize that both, the non-modified and the UB-modified forms of K578 are required for viral replication.The dynamic structure simulations indicate that K578R stabilizes the PB2 loop differently, leading to an altered favored positioning profile of residue Q73. Because PB1-K578R demonstrated WT-like polymerase dimerization and cRNA to vRNA synthesis in the transfection-infection experimental setting (Figs. 5e, 6c) we speculate, that this position of the loop represents the favorable position for assembly of the symmetric dimer. Despite the WT-like behavior in several assays, K578R is detrimental for viral replication and does only allow the generation of viable recombinant viruses when rapid reversion to the natural K is achieved. Based on these results and the currently discussed models of vRNA replication, we speculate that the PB1-K578R encounters at least two problems during infection caused by the absence of UB-mediated charge neutralization (Fig. 6d). First, the incoming vRNP produces high levels of viral mRNAs leading to expression of new trimeric polymerases harboring PB1-K578R as well as free NP. Due to the constant positive charge of PB1-K578R, the free trimeric polymerase has a high affinity to interact with NP, which reduces both, the pools of free trimeric polymerase needed for formation of the different dimers as well as NP that is required for cRNP and vRNP assembly. Secondly, we assume that PB1-K578R promotes premature assembly of the symmetric polymerase dimer possibly already between the incoming vRNP-associated polymerase and newly expressed PB1-K578R harboring polymerase, which leads to abortion of cRNA synthesis. Both mechanisms lead to an imbalanced viral RNA synthesis and will pose a strong pressure for reversion to the modifiable lysine. In reverse conclusion, we propose that ubiquitination of K578 is required to decrease NP binding to newly synthesized trimeric polymerases to retain the free polymerase pool and to achieve correct positioning of the PB2 loop that prevents the premature assembly of the symmetric dimer. The mechanism underlying decreased NP binding to the trimeric polymerase but not the vRNA-associated NP by mutation K578A or K578 ubiquitination remains open to speculations. Whether this is also mediated by a charge-dependent mechanism that affects the positioning of the PB2 loop or rather involves shielding of the NP binding site by the UB moiety cannot be concluded from our results. Moreover, it remains elusive whether our results reflect reduced binding of the first NP in the vRNP, or the terminating NP and if NP binding and dimer formation are competitive events due to the overlapping binding sites.The responsible E3 ligase for PB1-K578 ubiquitination is not known. A previous report demonstrated that among the more than 600 E3 Ubiquitin ligases UBR5, STUB1/CHIP, HUWE1, and DDB1 interact with the viral replication machinery in infected cells14. Several groups have previously used comparative interactomics of the human ubiquitin proteasome system with viral proteins, genome-wide RNAi library screens or mass spectrometry-based interaction screens22,30,65 to identify candidate E3 ligases that facilitate ubiquitination of viral proteins. The results of our study can now be combined with such technologies to link cellular E3 ligases to site-specific modifications in the viral polymerase and uncover new therapeutic targets. In conclusion, in addition to generating the first comprehensive ubiquitin landscape of the viral polymerase, our results provide a novel and unexpected role of host-derived ubiquitination of residue PB1-K578 in the PB1 thumb domain for the coordination of NP binding, polymerase dimerization and vRNA replication (Fig. 6d). These novel findings advance our understanding of the enigmatic binding site of NP to the polymerase trimer and unravel the important role of the flexible N-terminal PB2 loop for the formation of the symmetric polymerase dimer. Moreover, our study emphasizes the remarkable potential of UB-modifications to fine-tune protein structures and functions way beyond the mechanism of proteolytic degradation.MethodsCellsMadin-Darby Canine Kidney cells type II (MDCK-II), human embryonic kidney 293T cells (HEK293-T), and human alveolar epithelial cells (A549) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS; Capricorn) and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (P/S; Sigma). All cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2. MDCK-II, HEK293-T, and A549 cells were provided by Martin Schwemmle (Freiburg, Germany).PlasmidsFor generation of recombinant influenza A viruses, the eight reverse genetics bi-directional pHW-2000 plasmids encoding vRNA and viral proteins derived from the A/WSN/1933 (H1N1) (WSN) virus were used66. Mutations in pHW-2000 PB2, PB1, and PA plasmids were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis (SDM). To create overexpressing plasmids encoding for mutated PB2, PB1, and PA of WSN, A/PR/8/1934 (PR8), and A/SC35M/1980 (SC35M), the respective pHW-2000 plasmids bearing the respective mutations were used as templates and subjected to assembly PCR to introduce restriction sites for NotI and XhoI restriction enzymes (NEB). The resulted PCR fragments were cloned into pCAGGs plasmids. pCAGGs vectors that encode Strep-tagged polymerase subunit constructs of WSN-derived wild type PB2, PB1 and PA were created likewise. The pCAGGs plasmids encoding C-terminally HA-tagged PB1 and PA fusion proteins were a kind gift from Martin Schwemmle (Freiburg, Germany) and described previously67. The pPolI-Firefly reporter plasmid encodes a negative-sensed luciferase gene flanked by the 5′ and 3′ non-coding regions of the NS segment. Likewise, the pPolI-Firefly-UP-Promoter encodes a positive-sensed luciferase gene and has been described before68. Both were used for minigenome assays together with the pTK-Renilla plasmid. pRK5-HA-Ubiquitin-WT was a gift from Ted Dawson (Addgene plasmid #17608) and pcDNA3-HA-NEDD8 was a gift from Edward Yeh (Addgene plasmid #18711). The pCMV2b-RGS-His-ISG15 WT plasmid was a gift from Gerrit Praefcke (Langen, Germany).Expression of viral proteinsHEK293-T cells were transfected with pCAGGs plasmids encoding for PA, PB2, PB1 (WT or mutant), 24 h p.t. the cells were lysed using ice-cold radio immunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA; 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 25 mM TRIS (pH 7.5), 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail). Clarified cell lysates were adjusted to equal amounts using Pierce™ BCA assay (Thermo Fisher), mixed with Laemmli buffer (4X), incubated at 95 °C for 5 min, and subjected to SDS-PAGE and western blot. Proteins were detected using the primary antibodies rabbit anti-PB1 (GTX125923, Genetex; 1:2000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PA (GTX125932, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer), and mouse anti-Tubulin (clone DM1A, Sigma-Aldrich; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and the secondary antibody anti-Rabbit IgG-800CW (LI-COR; 1:10,000 in blocking buffer), and anti-Mouse IgG-680RD (LI-COR; 1:10,000 in blocking buffer). Uncropped blots are provided in a source data file.Detection of post-translational modification by affinity precipitationFor detection of ubiquitination, A549 cells were cotransfected with pCAGGs plasmids expressing nStrep-PB2-, nStrep-PB1, or nStrep-PA fusion proteins with HA-ubiquitin using X-tremeGENE HP DNA Transfection Reagent (Sigma). Due to the reduced expression levels of plasmids that encode HA-tagged NEDD8 or His-tagged ISG15 in A549 cells, the modification of the polymerase subunits with these UBLs was performed in HEK293-T cells by co-transfection of the respective plasmids with Lipofectamin 2000 (Invitrogen). A549 cells were processed 48 h post transfection (p. t.) and HEK293-T cells 24 h post transfection as previously described69. Briefly, cells were treated with lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, Protease inhibitor cocktail), proteins were denatured at 95 °C for 10 min, sonicated for 30 s, renatured in a dilution buffer (10 mM TRIS HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100) for 1 h at 4 °C and then clarified by centrifugation. Clarified lysates were adjusted to equal amounts using Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher) and precipitated using Strep-Tactin sepharose beads (IBA Lifescience) at 4 °C for 2 h. Beads were washed thrice using a stringent washing buffer (10 mM TRIS-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Igepal CA-630). In case of deubiquitinase treatment, the beads were washed twice with DUB reaction buffer (1X), as provided in UbiCREST Kit70, and incubated with USP2 at 37 °C for 30 min according to the manufacturer description. Precipitated proteins were eluted using 1X Laemmli buffer (0.25 M TRIS (pH 6.8), 40% glycerol, 8% SDS, 10% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.01% bromophenol blue) by incubation at 95 °C for 5 min. The precipitated samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and western blot. Covalently bound modification by HA-ubiquitin, HA-NEDD8, or His-ISG15 of each polymerase subunit was detected using the primary antibodies rat anti-HA-Tag (clone 3F10, Roche; 1:500 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-NEDD8 (clone Y297, Abcam; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) or mouse anti-His-Tag (clone HIS.H8, Thermo Fisher; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and secondary antibodies anti-Rat IgG-HRP (Cell signaling Technologies; 1:3000 in blocking buffer), anti-Rabbit IgG - HRP (Cell signaling Technologies; 1:3000 in blocking buffer) and anti-Mouse IgG - HRP (Cell signaling Technologies; 1:3000 in blocking buffer). Polymerase subunits were detected using the primary antibodies rabbit anti-PB2 (GTX125926, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PB1 (GTX125923, Genetex; 1:2000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PA (GTX125932, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and the secondary antibody anti-Rabbit IgG-680RD (LI-COR; 1:1000 in blocking buffer). Uncropped blots are provided in a source data file.Mass spectrometry analyses of K-ε-GG-enriched peptidesInfection was carried out by incubating 108 A549 cells with IAV WSN in PBS supplemented with 0.7% BSA, 1% CaCl2, and 1% MgCl2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20 for 30 min at 4 °C and subsequently for additional 30 min at 37 °C. For the detection of the ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) on the IAV polymerase subunits, the PTMScan®-Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) was applied according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 5 h post infection (p.i.) cells were lysed using Urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 8), 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate), followed by sonication. Clarified lysates were reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol (DTT) and chloroacetamide, respectively, and diluted 3-fold with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Lysates were trypsin digested by incubation with 1% TPCK-Trypsin (m/v in 1 mM HCl) overnight at 25 °C, desalted using Sep-Pak® C18 cartridges and immunoaffinity purification (IAP) using the anti-(K-ε-GG) motif antibody of the kit. Final purification was performed on Stage tips as described before71.Peptides enriched for the ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) were dissolved in either 0.5% acetic acid or 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis using a LTQ Velos Orbitrap (n = 1) or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (n = 3; Thermo Scientific), respectively. Each MS instrument was online coupled to an EASY nLC nanoflow HPLC system via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific), harboring in-house packed fused silica capillary column (length 15 cm; ID 75 µm; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm). Following loading, bound peptides were eluted using a linear 240 min gradient from 3–40% B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) followed by a short gradient from 35–98% B in 10 min at a flow rate of 300 or 250 nl/min. After washing at 98% B the column was re-equilibrated at starting conditions. The Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, switching in a data-dependent fashion between survey scans in the orbitrap (mass range m/z = 300–1650; resolution R = 60,000; target value = 1e6; lockmass set to 445.120025) and collision induced fragmentation and MS/MS acquisition in the LTQ part. MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense ion peaks detected in the MS1 scans were recorded. Conditions for the analysis using the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer were kept similar (Top17 DDA; Full MS R = 60,000; AGC target = 3e6; Maximum IT = 100 ms; scan range 300–1750 m/z; ddMS2 R = 15,000; max IT = 50 ms; NCE = 27 V). Dynamic exclusion was enabled on both MS systems.Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 2.0.1.0) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Influenza A virus (strain A/Wilson-Smith/1933 H1N1; UP000000834.fasta; version from 10/2016) as well as against the human UniprotKB database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version from 04/2019) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and also containing common lab contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification for the search in the database, while oxidation at methionine and acetylation of the protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. For the identification of ubiquitination sites, modification of lysine residues with the remnant diglycyl motif was allowed as additional variable modification. Trypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 7 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. Common lab contaminants and proteins containing reverse sequences that were derived from the decoy database were filtered out from the dataset prior to any further analysis. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications. Ubiquitination sites were accepted when they were identified with a localization probability of >0.75 (class I sites). PX partial: All mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD030816, DOI: 10.6019/PXD03081672.Sequence analysisPB1, PB2, and PA sequences from isolates of human, swine and avian IAV origin were downloaded from NCBI. 2004 sequences for IAV PB2 and 1630 sequences for IAV PB1 were downloaded on 09/15/2017. 2016 sequences for IAV PA were downloaded on 10/01/2017. The cd-hit was used to assign clusters of 99% sequence identity. Sequences of each protein were aligned using MUSCLE (multiple sequence comparison by Log-Expectation).Polymerase reconstitution assayHEK293-T cells were cotransfected with 50 ng of pCAGGs plasmids expressing PA, PB2, PB1 (either WT or mutant) together with 200 ng of pCAGGs-NP plasmids and 25 ng of both pTK-Renilla plasmids and the vRNA expressing pPolI-Firefly or the cRNA expressing pPolI-Firefly-Up-Promoter plasmids using Lipofectamin™ 2000. 24 h post transfection cells were lysed and relative polymerase activity was examined using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay (Promega) and reporter gene expression was determined by measuring luminescence using a MicroLumat Plus LB96V luminometer (Berthold Technologies).Generation of recombinant virusesFor generating recombinant viruses co-cultivated HEK293-T cells and MDCK-II cells were co-transfected with the eight pHW-2000 plasmids derived from WSN (WT or mutant) using Lipofectamin™ 2000 (Invitrogen). After 6 h of incubation in Gibco™ Opti-MEM™ I Reduced Serum Medium (Thermo Fisher) at 37 °C the supernatant was removed and cells were incubated with infection medium (DMEM supplemented with 0.7% BSA, 1% CaCl2/MgCl2, and TPCK-Trypsin) for 48 h at 37 °C. The virus rescue supernatant was plaque purified on MDCK-II cells by plaque assays using Oxoid™ purified agar (Thermo Fisher). Then, MDCK-II cells were infected with single plaques diluted in infection PBS and incubated in infection medium for 48 h at 37 °C. Final virus stocks were obtained by passaging this supernatant once on MDCK-II cells with a defined MOI of 0.001. To control for the respective mutation, MDCK-II cells were infected with an MOI of 2. After 6 h, cells were lysed and RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen). The respective gene segment was amplified using OneStep RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) and sequenced by Sanger sequencing (Eurofins Genomics).Viral genome sequencingFollowing isolation of the viral RNA from virus supernatant using QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen), each vRNA segment was reverse transcribed using the SuperScriptTM III One-Step RT PCR System with PlatinumTM Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen). In the following, approximately 1 ng of the pooled PCR products was used as template and introduced into library preparation with the Nextera XT DNA Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina) and paired-end sequenced with the 2 × 250 bp MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 (Illumina) with an average insert size of 300 bp on a MiSeq instrument (Illumina). The protocols for library preparation and sequencing were conducted as recommended by the manufacturer (Illumina). After automatic demultiplexing on the MiSeq instrument, the resulting fastq files were mapped onto the Influenza A virus strain A/WSN/1933(H1N1) reference sequence (GenBank accession numbers CY034132-CY034139) using the BWA mapping algorithm implemented in the Ridom SeqSphere+ software (v7) with default parameters. Subsequently, variant positions (detection via the software with default parameters) were checked manually and the variant read frequencies and percentage of each nucleotide at the respective position were determined.Accumulation of viral segments during virus rescueTo assess the accumulation of viral segments during virus rescue with limited virus propagation HEK293-T cells were cotransfected with the eight pHW-2000 plasmid system derived from WSN using Lipofectamin™ 2000. 16 h and 48 h post transfection RNA was isolated using TRIzol (Thermo Fisher). Residual DNA was digested using recombinant DNase I (Roche). The RNA was reverse transcribed with oligo(dT) or Uni12 primers using RevertAid H Minus Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, primers and 500 ng RNA were heated at 70 °C for 5 min, immediately chilled on ice for 1 min, and then heated at 37 °C for 2 min. Then, a mixture of First Strand Buffer (5x, Invitrogen), dNTPs, and RevertAid H Minus Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min, followed by an incubation at 42 °C for 60 min. Reverse transcription was terminated by incubation at 85 °C for 5 min. CT values were measured in duplicates using a LightCycler® 480 II (Roche) and the LightCycler® 480 Software (v1.5.1.62), normalized to the expression data of the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GADPH) and analyzed using the 2−ΔΔCT method73.Quantification of viral RNA by strand-specific RT-PCRHEK293-T cells were transfected with 250 ng of pCAGGs plasmids expressing WT or mutant PB2, PB1, and PA, 1000 ng of NP and 100 ng of a pol-I driven minigenome firefly reporter plasmid expressing vRNA, using Lipofectamin™ 2000. 16 h p.t. RNA was isolated using TRIzol (Thermo Fisher) and dissolved in RNase-free water. Residual DNA was digested using recombinant DNase I (Roche). For reverse transcription a mixture of tagged primers directed to either m-, c-, or vRNA of the firefly minigenome (designed according to Kawakami et al.58), oligo-dT primers, and 250 ng RNA were heated at 65 °C for 10 min, immediately chilled on ice for 5 min and then heated at 60 °C for 5 min. Then, a mixture of First Strand Buffer (5x, Invitrogen), 0.1 M dithiothreitol, dNTPs, and Maxima H Minus Reverse transcriptase (Thermo Scientific) was added and incubated at 60 °C for 60 min. Reverse transcription was terminated by incubation at 85 °C for 5 min. RT-PCR was carried out using Brilliant III SYBR Green (Agilent) and primers directed to the respective tags. CT values were measured in duplicates using a LightCycler® 480 II (Roche) and the LightCycler® 480 Software (v1.5.1.62), normalized to the expression data of the housekeeping GADPH and analyzed using the 2-ΔΔCT method. Primer sequences are included within Supplementary Data 1.cRNP stabilization assayHEK293-T cells were cotransfected with pCAGGs plasmids that express for PB2, PA, and NP together with pCAGGs plasmids for either WT or inactive PB1 (PB1a:D445A/D446A) harboring the indicated mutations using Lipofectamin™ 2000. After maintaining the cells on Gibco™ Opti-MEM™ (Thermo Fisher) for 6 h, the medium was exchanged to DMEM (supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% P/S). 24 h p.t. the cells were infected with WSN WT virus at an MOI of 5 and maintained on infection medium (supplemented with 100 µg/ml cycloheximide (CHX)). For controls, PA was substituted with an empty vector, cells were mock infected or CHX was omitted. 6 h p.i., RNA was isolated using TRIzol (Thermo Fisher). For reverse transcription the protocol of strand-specific qPCR (as described above) was applied using tagged oligo-dT primers as well as primers for c- and vRNA of the NA segment. CT values were measured in duplicates using a LightCycler® 480 II (Roche) and the LightCycler® 480 Software (v1.5.1.62), normalized to the expression data of the housekeeping gene GADPH and analyzed using the 2 − ΔΔCT method. Primer sequences are included within Supplementary Data 1.Immunofluorescence analysisA549 cells were seeded on glass coverslips and transfected with pCAGGs plasmids expressing either WT or mutants of PB2, PB1 (in combination with nHA-PA), and PA (in combination with nHA-PB1)74 using XtremeGeneTM (Roche) 24 h p.t., cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and blocked with 3% BSA in PBS (blocking buffer). For immunostaining coverslips were incubated with the primary antibodies rabbit anti-PB2 (GTX125926; Genetex; 1:3000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PB1 (GTX125923, Genetex; 1:3000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PA (GTX125932, Genetex; 1:3000 in blocking buffer), rat anti-HA-Tag (clone 3F10, Roche; 1:500 in blocking buffer), overnight at 4 °C and with secondary antibodies anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen; 1:2000 in blocking buffer) or anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 568 (Invitrogen; 1:2000 in blocking buffer) and anti-rat Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen; 1:2000 in blocking buffer) for 1 h at room temperature. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 20 min at room temperature. Coverslips were mounted using Mounting Medium S3023 (Dako Omnis) and examined using an LSM-800 Airyscan confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss) and ZEN software (v2.6).Hemagglutination inhibition assayTo quantify the total amount of virus particles after infection, the volume of the assessed supernatants was adjusted to a final volume of 50 µl based on the PFU titer using infection PBS. The virus samples were serially diluted (1:2) in infection PBS until dilution 1:1024 in a V-bottom-shaped microtiter plate. Then, 50 µl of fresh human erythrocytes (blood type: 0) was added to each well, mixed with the virus dilutions, and incubated for 1 h on 4 °C.Affinity precipitation of NP-polymerase complexesHEK293-T cells were transfected with pCAGGs plasmids encoding for Strep-tagged NP (nStrep-NP) fusion protein, HA-tagged PA (nHA-PA), PB2, PB1 (WT or mutant), and a pol-I driven minigenome firefly (FF) reporter plasmid using Lipofectamin® 2000. For negative controls, nStrep-NP, PB2, and nHA-PA plasmids were substituted with an empty vector. 24 h p.t. the cells were lysed using ice-cold Co-IP lysis buffer (50 mM TRIS (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA,1% (v/v) Igepal CA-630, protease inhibitor cocktail), as described before75. Clarified cell lysates were adjusted to equal amounts using Pierce™ BCA assay (Thermo Fisher) and precipitated using Strep-Tactin sepharose beads (IBA Lifescience) for 2 h at 4 °C. Beads were washed 5 times using Co-IP washing buffer (50 mM TRIS (pH 8.0), 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) Igepal CA-630). Precipitated proteins were eluted in Laemmli buffer (1X) and subjected to SDS-PAGE and western blot. Co-precipitated proteins were detected using the primary antibodies rabbit anti-NP (GTX125989, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer), rat anti-HA-Tag (clone: 3F10, Roche; 1:5000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PB1 (GTX125923, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PB2 (GTX125926, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and mouse anti-Tubulin (clone DM1A, Sigma-Aldrich; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and the secondary antibodies anti-Rabbit IgG-800CW (LI-COR; 1:10,000 in blocking buffer), anti-Rat IgG-HRP (Cell signaling Technologies; 1:3000 in blocking buffer) and anti-Mouse IgG-680RD (LI-COR; 1:10,000 in blocking buffer). Uncropped blots are provided in a source data file.Dimerization of the viral polymeraseHEK293-T cells were transfected with pCAGGs plasmids expressing nStrep-PA, nHA-PA, WT, or mutant PB1 and PB2, using Lipofectamin™ 2000 (Invitrogen). For negative controls nStrep-PA, nHA-PA, and PB2 plasmids were substituted with an empty vector. After 24 h cells were lysed in 400 µl of TRIS lysis buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCl (pH 7.6), 200 mM NaCl, 25% glycerol, 0.5% Igepal CA-630, 1 mM DTT, protease inhibitor cocktail) for 30 min at 4 °C, as described before12. Clarified cell lysates were adjusted to equal amounts using Pierce™ BCA assay (Thermo Fisher) and precipitated using Strep-Tactin sepharose beads (IBA Lifescience) at 4 °C for 16 h. Beads were washed 5 times with a washing buffer (10 mM TRIS-HCl (pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Igepal CA-630) and proteins were eluted using 1x Laemmli buffer. Precipitated proteins were detected by western blot using the primary antibodies rat anti-HA-Tag (clone: 3F10, Roche; 1:500 in blocking buffer), mouse anti-Strep-Tag (clone GT661, Sigma-Aldrich), rabbit anti-PB1 (GTX125923, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer), rabbit anti-PB2 (GTX125926, Genetex; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and mouse anti-Tubulin (clone DM1A, Sigma-Aldrich; 1:1000 in blocking buffer) and the secondary antibodies, anti-Rat IgG-800CW (LI-COR; 1:10,000 in blocking buffer), anti-Mouse IgG-HRP (Cell signaling Technologies; 1:3000 in blocking buffer), and anti-Rabbit IgG-680RD (LI-COR; 1:10,000 in blocking buffer). Uncropped blots are provided in a source data file.Homology modeling of WSN polymerase structuresFor both models of IAV WSN polymerase bound to vRNA as well as the IAV WSN polymerase model bound to cRNA comparative homology modeling was performed using MODELLER (v9.19). For the vRNA-bound polymerase model the crystal structure of the heterotrimeric Bat Influenza A polymerase bound to the vRNA promoter (PDB: 4WSB) served as a template, for the cRNA-bound polymerase model the crystal structure of Influenza B virus in complex with 5′ cRNA (PDB: 5EPI) served as a template. Crystal structure sequences were aligned with the polymerase subunit sequences of WSN ((i) A/WSN/1933(H1N1) PA (GenBank: CY034137); (ii) A/WSN/1933(H1N1) PB1 (GenBank: CY034138 and (iii) A/WSN/1933(H1N1) PB2 (GenBank: CY034139) and 100 homology models (including loop models) were created of both conformation states based on these WSN sequences. The RNA was transferred as a rigid body from the respective original structure. A ‘slow’ optimization protocol and ‘slow’ molecular dynamics refinement was further applied. The linker regions were modeled using “loop model” without imposing any restraints on its structure. The best models were selected based on a normalized energy score. The models were scored using the normalized DOPE score available in MODELLER. Subsequently, superposition models were prepared by VMD (v1.9.3) and figures were generated using PyMOL (v2.3.0, The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Schrodinger LLC) or ChimeraX (v1.3.)76,77.Molecular dynamic simulationsThe homology model of the three-dimensional structure of the WSN polymerase complex bound to cRNA was used for further structural analyses. The residue PB1-K578 was mutated to K578A or K578R leading to three independent models for further simulations. Each model was prepared and energy minimized for local simulations by initialization procedure of YASARA structure (v21.6.2 and v21.8.27)78 using AMBER1479 force field including structure cleaning and hydrogen network optimization80,81, generation of a water shell (TIP3P) around the protein model as well as prediction of pKA values at the chosen pH of 7.482. After short equilibration simulation (~5 ns, AMBER14) of the whole protein, the models were subjected to 100 ns local molecular dynamic simulations. Since previous results clearly identified the PB1-PB2 loop-interface as the crucial region for altered behavior of K578R and K578A, molecular dynamic (MD) simulations were conducted to evaluate the interplay between these two domains. To achieve a simulation time sufficient for interplay analyses, local MD simulations were performed, which was only possible due to the strong separation of single functional domains in the protein complex. Especially the PB1-PB2 loop-interface can be identified as an independent domain of the complex, that encompasses a spatial dimension equal to a 45 Å-sphere. Therefore, atoms in a 45 Å-sphere around residue PB1-K578 including only protein residues were set mobile, while all other atoms were immobilized. Further, the size of the simulation box was limited to 92.95 × 92.95 × 92.95 Å, which is sufficient to include a fully mobile water shell, all mobile protein residues as well as enough immobilized protein residues to ensure stability and integrity of the protein. On the other hand, this procedure reduces the possibility of extensive MD artefact formation due to the presence of large amounts of immobilized residues. Using this approach, we optimized the needed calculation time and computational resources leading to a simulation time of 100 ns for each replicate, which was not achievable in an all-atoms mobile simulation for the complete protein. Local MD simulations were conducted using the following settings: AMBER15IPQ force field83, particle-mesh Ewald/Poisson-Boltzmann cutoff 8 Å, periodic simulation cell boundary, long range coulomb forces, 0.9% NaCl, pH = 7.4, water density 0.997 (TIP3P), pressure of 1 atm and a simulation temperature of 298 K. Complete simulation including temperature and pressure settings was controlled by a NPT ensemble and atomic motions were integrated with a multiple timestep of 2 × 1.25 fs for bonded interactions and 2.5 fs for non-bonded interactions as previously described84. Local simulations were replicated to n = 4 for all conditions (WT, K578R, K578A). Each simulation was documented by simulation snapshots every 0.1 ns leading to a total number of 4000 analyzable snapshots for each condition.The calculation of the RMSF is performed in three automated steps. First, the mean position (\(\bar{{P}_{{ij}}}\)) of the distinct atom (i) is calculated using atom position vector (P) with j = 3 components for the x, y, and z coordinates of every single snapshot (k) from the 100 ns simulation (N = 1000). In the second step, the root mean square fluctuation is calculated by the following equation:$${{{{{{{\rm{RMSF}}}}}}}}_{i}=\sqrt{{\sum }_{j=1}^{3}\left(\frac{1}{N}{\sum }_{k=1}^{N}{P}_{{ikj}}^{2}-{\bar{{P}_{{ij}}}}^{2}\right)}$$ (1) Both steps are performed for all atoms individually. In the final step, the RMSF for each residue is calculated by the average RMSF of its constituting atoms.Data analysis and statisticsQuantitative data were analyzed and plotted using GraphPad PRISM™ (v7.04) and Origin 2022 (v9.9). Immune fluorescence images were analyzed using ImageJ (v1.53c). Intensities of immuno-stained western blots were quantified using Image Studio 5.2.5 (Li-COR Biosciences). Biochemistry experiments were performed at least in triplicate unless otherwise stated, and representative gels are shown. Details of statistical tests and replicates are provided in the figure legends.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The mass spectrometry proteomics data generated in this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD030816, https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD030816 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD030816). MD simulations were conducted using the commercially available software YASARA dynamics (v21.6.2 and v21.8.27) and the implemented macros “md_run.mcr” and “md_analyze.mcr”. Source code of YASARA macros can be downloaded from www.yasara.org. Raw simulation data encompassing around 40 gigabytes are available from the corresponding author. The study made use of the publicly available datasets: NCBI: PB1, PB2, and PA sequences from isolates of human, swine, and avian IAV origin were downloaded on 09/15/2017 (PB2, PB1) and 10/01/2017 (PA). PDB entries: 4WSB, 5EPI, 6QNW, 7NHA, 4WSA, 5D9A, 6T0N, 6TW1, 6T0S, 6T0V, 6SZU, 6T2C, 6T0U, and 2VQZ. GenBank: accession numbers CY034132, CY034133, CY034134, CY034135, CY034136, CY034137, CY034138, and CY034139. UniprotKB database (UP000000834.fasta version from 10/2016; UP000005640_9606.fasta version from 04/2019). Biochemical data generated in this study are provided in the Source data file. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesRuigrok, R. W. & Baudin, F. Structure of influenza virus ribonucleoprotein particles. II. Purified RNA-free influenza virus ribonucleoprotein forms structures that are indistinguishable from the intact influenza virus ribonucleoprotein particles. J. Gen. Virol. 76, 1009–1014 (1995).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Compans, R. W., Content, J. & Duesberg, P. H. Structure of the ribonucleoprotein of influenza virus. J. Virol. 10, 795–800 (1972).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fodor, E. & te Velthuis Aartjan J. W. Structure and function of the influenza virus transcription and replication machinery. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 10, a038398 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Krischuns, T., Lukarska, M., Naffakh, N. & Cusack, S. Influenza virus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and the host transcriptional apparatus. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 90, 321–348 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wandzik, J. M. et al. A structure-based model for the complete transcription cycle of influenza polymerase. Cell 181, 877–893.e21 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Beaton, A. R. & Krug, R. M. Selected host cell capped RNA fragments prime influenza viral RNA transcription in vivo. Nucleic Acids Res. 9, 4423–4436 (1981).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar te Velthuis, A. J. W. & Fodor, E. Influenza virus RNA polymerase: insights into the mechanisms of viral RNA synthesis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 479–493 (2016).Article Google Scholar Thierry, E. et al. Influenza polymerase can adopt an alternative configuration involving a radical repacking of PB2 domains. Mol. Cell 61, 125–137 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Carrique, L. et al. Host ANP32A mediates the assembly of the influenza virus replicase. Nature 587, 638–643 (2020).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nilsson-Payant BE, tenOever BR, Velthuis AJWt. The Host Factor ANP32A Is Required for Influenza A Virus vRNA and cRNA Synthesis. J. Virol. 96, e02092–21 (2022)Fan, H. et al. Structures of influenza A virus RNA polymerase offer insight into viral genome replication. Nature 573, 287–290 (2019).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, K.-Y., Santos Afonso, E. D., Enouf, V., Isel, C. & Naffakh, N. Influenza virus polymerase subunits co-evolve to ensure proper levels of dimerization of the heterotrimer. PLoS Pathog. 15, e1008034 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dawson, A. R. & Mehle, A. Flu’s cues: exploiting host post-translational modifications to direct the influenza virus replication cycle. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1007205 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hubel, P. et al. A protein-interaction network of interferon-stimulated genes extends the innate immune system landscape. Nat. Immunol. 20, 493–502 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Dawson, A. R. et al. Phosphorylation controls RNA binding and transcription by the influenza virus polymerase. PLoS Pathog. 16, e1008841 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zheng, W. et al. Phosphorylation controls the nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of influenza A virus nucleoprotein. J. Virol. 89, 5822–5834 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Turrell, L., Hutchinson, E. C., Vreede, F. T. & Fodor, E. Regulation of influenza A virus nucleoprotein oligomerization by phosphorylation. J. Virol. 89, 1452–1455 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Mondal, A., Potts, G. K., Dawson, A. R., Coon, J. J. & Mehle, A. Phosphorylation at the homotypic interface regulates nucleoprotein oligomerization and assembly of the influenza virus replication machinery. PLoS Pathog. 11, e1004826 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hutchinson, E. C. et al. Mapping the phosphoproteome of influenza A and B viruses by mass spectrometry. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002993 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Giese, S. et al. Role of influenza A virus NP acetylation on viral growth and replication. Nat. Commun. 8, 1259 (2017).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hatakeyama, D. et al. Influenza A virus nucleoprotein is acetylated by histone acetyltransferases PCAF and GCN5. J. Biol. Chem. 293, 7126–7138 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lin, Y.-C., Jeng, K.-S. & Lai, M. M. C. CNOT4-mediated ubiquitination of influenza A virus nucleoprotein promotes viral RNA replication. mBio 8, e00597–17 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liao, T.-L., Wu, C.-Y., Su, W.-C., Jeng, K.-S. & Lai, M. M. C. Ubiquitination and deubiquitination of NP protein regulates influenza A virus RNA replication. EMBO J. 29, 3879–3890 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Di Pietro, A. et al. TRIM22 inhibits influenza A virus infection by targeting the viral nucleoprotein for degradation. J. Virol. 87, 4523–4533 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Patil, G. et al. TRIM41-mediated ubiquitination of nucleoprotein limits influenza A virus infection. J. Virol. 92, e00905–e00918 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lin, H.-T. et al. Grail attenuates influenza A virus infection and pathogenesis by inhibiting viral nucleoprotein. Sci. Rep. 8, 17242 (2018).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kirui, J., Mondal, A. & Mehle, A. Ubiquitination upregulates influenza virus polymerase function. J. Virol. 90, 10906–10914 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fu, B. et al. TRIM32 senses and restricts influenza A virus by ubiquitination of PB1 polymerase. PLoS Pathog. 11, e1004960 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu, C.-H., Zhou, L., Chen, G. & Krug, R. M. Battle between influenza A virus and a newly identified antiviral activity of the PARP-containing ZAPL protein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 14048–14053 (2015).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Biquand, E. et al. Comparative profiling of ubiquitin proteasome system interplay with influenza A virus PB2 polymerase protein recapitulating virus evolution in humans. mSphere 2, e00330–17 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Karim, M. et al. Nonproteolytic K29-linked ubiquitination of the PB2 replication protein of influenza a viruses by proviral cullin 4-based E3 Ligases. mBio 11, e00305–e00320 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pal, S., Santos, A., Rosas, J. M., Ortiz-Guzman, J. & Rosas-Acosta, G. Influenza A virus interacts extensively with the cellular SUMOylation system during infection. Virus Res. 158, 12–27 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Han, Q. et al. Sumoylation of influenza A virus nucleoprotein is essential for intracellular trafficking and virus growth. J. Virol. 88, 9379–9390 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhang, T. et al. NEDDylation of PB2 reduces its stability and blocks the replication of influenza A virus. Sci. Rep. 7, 43691 (2017).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhao, C. et al. Influenza B virus non-structural protein 1 counteracts ISG15 antiviral activity by sequestering ISGylated viral proteins. Nat. Commun. 7, 12754 (2016).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ball, K. A. et al. Non-degradative ubiquitination of protein kinases. PLOS Comput. Biol. 12, e1004898 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Reich, S. et al. Structural insight into cap-snatching and RNA synthesis by influenza polymerase. Nature 516, 361–366 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sugiyama, K. et al. Structural insight into the essential PB1-PB2 subunit contact of the influenza virus RNA polymerase. EMBO J. 28, 1803–1811 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Reuther, P., Mänz, B., Brunotte, L., Schwemmle, M. & Wunderlich, K. Targeting of the influenza A virus polymerase PB1-PB2 interface indicates strain-specific assembly differences. J. Virol. 85, 13298–13309 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Toyoda, T., Adyshev, D. M., Kobayashi, M., Iwata, A. & Ishihama, A. Molecular assembly of the influenza virus RNA polymerase: determination of the subunit-subunit contact sites. J. Gen. Virol. 77, 2149–2157 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Poole, E., Elton, D., Medcalf, L. & Digard, P. Functional domains of the influenza A virus PB2 protein: identification of NP- and PB1-binding sites. Virology 321, 120–133 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pflug, A., Guilligay, D., Reich, S. & Cusack, S. Structure of influenza A polymerase bound to the viral RNA promoter. Nature 516, 355–360 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hemerka, J. N. et al. Detection and characterization of influenza A virus PA-PB2 interaction through a bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay. J. Virol. 83, 3944–3955 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Szeto, W.-C., Hsia, H.-P., Tang, Y.-S. & Shaw, P.-C. Interaction between influenza A virus nucleoprotein and PB2 cap-binding domain is mediated by RNA. PLoS ONE 15, e0239899 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hsia, H.-P. et al. Amino acid substitutions affecting aspartic acid 605 and valine 606 decrease the interaction strength between the influenza virus RNA polymerase PB2 ‘627’ domain and the viral nucleoprotein. PLoS ONE 13, e0191226 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pumroy, R. A., Ke, S., Hart, D. J., Zachariae, U. & Cingolani, G. Molecular determinants for nuclear import of influenza A PB2 by importin α isoforms 3 and 7. Structure 23, 374–384 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tarendeau, F. et al. Structure and nuclear import function of the C-terminal domain of influenza virus polymerase PB2 subunit. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 229–233 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hara, K., Schmidt, F. I., Crow, M. & Brownlee, G. G. Amino acid residues in the N-terminal region of the PA subunit of influenza A virus RNA polymerase play a critical role in protein stability, endonuclease activity, cap binding, and virion RNA promoter binding. J. Virol. 80, 7789–7798 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yuan, P. et al. Crystal structure of an avian influenza polymerase PA(N) reveals an endonuclease active site. Nature 458, 909–913 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Xiao, S. et al. Magnesium-dependent RNA binding to the PA endonuclease domain of the avian influenza polymerase. J. Phys. Chem. B 118, 873–889 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lukarska, M. et al. Structural basis of an essential interaction between influenza polymerase and Pol II CTD. Nature 541, 117–121 (2017).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wang, L. et al. Functional genomics reveals linkers critical for influenza virus polymerase. J. Virol. 90, 2938–2947 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar He, X. et al. Crystal structure of the polymerase PA(C)-PB1(N) complex from an avian influenza H5N1 virus. Nature 454, 1123–1126 (2008).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Obayashi, E. et al. The structural basis for an essential subunit interaction in influenza virus RNA polymerase. Nature 454, 1127–1131 (2008).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kouba, T., Drncová, P. & Cusack, S. Structural snapshots of actively transcribing influenza polymerase. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 460–470 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Walker, A. P., Sharps, J. & Fodor, E. Mutation of an influenza virus polymerase 3′ RNA promoter binding site inhibits transcription elongation. J. Virol. 94, e00498-20 (2020).Keown, J. R. et al. Mapping inhibitory sites on the RNA polymerase of the 1918 pandemic influenza virus using nanobodies. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–11 (2022).Article ADS Google Scholar Kawakami, E. et al. Strand-specific real-time RT-PCR for distinguishing influenza vRNA, cRNA, and mRNA. J. Virol. Methods 173, 1–6 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ng, A. K.-L. et al. Influenza polymerase activity correlates with the strength of interaction between nucleoprotein and PB2 through the host-specific residue K/E627. PLoS ONE 7, e36415 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mukaigawa, J. & Nayak, D. P. Two signals mediate nuclear localization of influenza virus (A/WSN/33) polymerase basic protein 2. J. Virol. 65, 245–253 (1991).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jorba, N., Coloma, R. & Ortín, J. Genetic trans-complementation establishes a new model for influenza virus RNA transcription and replication. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000462 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vreede, F. T., Jung, T. E. & Brownlee, G. G. Model suggesting that replication of influenza virus is regulated by stabilization of replicative intermediates. J. Virol. 78, 9568–9572 (2004).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Turrell, L., Lyall, J. W., Tiley, L. S., Fodor, E. & Vreede, F. T. The role and assembly mechanism of nucleoprotein in influenza A virus ribonucleoprotein complexes. Nat. Commun. 4, 1591 (2013).Article ADS PubMed Google Scholar Vreede, F. T., Ng, A. K.-L., Shaw, P.-C. & Fodor, E. Stabilization of influenza virus replication intermediates is dependent on the RNA-binding but not the homo-oligomerization activity of the viral nucleoprotein. J. Virol. 86, 640 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Central Google Scholar Mayer, D. et al. Identification of cellular interaction partners of the influenza virus ribonucleoprotein complex and polymerase complex using proteomic-based approaches. J. Proteome Res. 6, 672–682 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hoffmann, E., Neumann, G., Kawaoka, Y., Hobom, G. & Webster, R. G. A DNA transfection system for generation of influenza A virus from eight plasmids. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 6108–6113 (2000).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mänz, B., Brunotte, L., Reuther, P. & Schwemmle, M. Adaptive mutations in NEP compensate for defective H5N1 RNA replication in cultured human cells. Nat. Commun. 3, 802 (2012).Article ADS PubMed Google Scholar Azzeh, M., Flick, R. & Hobom, G. Functional analysis of the influenza A virus cRNA promoter and construction of an ambisense transcription system. Virology 289, 400–410 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Choo, Y. S. & Zhang, Z. Detection of protein ubiquitination. J. Vis. Exp. 1293, https://doi.org/10.3791/1293 (2009).Hospenthal, M. K., Mevissen, T. E. T. & Komander, D. Deubiquitinase-based analysis of ubiquitin chain architecture using Ubiquitin Chain Restriction (UbiCRest). Nat. Protoc. 10, 349–361 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y. & Mann, M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal. Chem. 75, 663–670 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database and related tools and resources in 2019: improving support for quantification data. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D442–D450 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Livak, K. J. & Schmittgen, T. D. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) method. Methods 25, 402–408 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Fodor, E. & Smith, M. The PA subunit is required for efficient nuclear accumulation of the PB1 subunit of the influenza A virus RNA polymerase complex. J. Virol. 78, 9144–9153 (2004).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Verhelst, J., Vlieger, D. de & Saelens, X. Co-immunoprecipitation of the mouse Mx1 protein with the influenza A virus nucleoprotein. J. Vis. Exp. 52871, https://doi.org/10.3791/52871 (2015).Schrödinger, L. L. C. & DeLano, W. (2020) PyMOL.Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. & Schulten, K. VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graph. 14, 33–38 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krieger, E. & Vriend, G. YASARA View—molecular graphics for all devices—from smartphones to workstations. Bioinformatics 30, 2981–2982 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Maier, J. A. et al. ff14SB: improving the accuracy of protein side chain and backbone parameters from ff99SB. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 3696–3713 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hooft, R. W., Sander, C. & Vriend, G. Positioning hydrogen atoms by optimizing hydrogen-bond networks in protein structures. Proteins 26, 363–376 (1996).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krieger, E., Dunbrack, R. L., Hooft, R. W. W. & Krieger, B. Assignment of protonation states in proteins and ligands: combining pKa prediction with hydrogen bonding network optimization. Methods Mol. Biol. 819, 405–421 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Krieger, E., Nielsen, J. E., Spronk, C. A. E. M. & Vriend, G. Fast empirical pKa prediction by Ewald summation. J. Mol. Graph. Model. 25, 481–486 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Debiec, K. T. et al. Further along the road less traveled: AMBER ff15ipq, an original protein force field built on a self-consistent physical model. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 12, 3926–3947 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Krieger, E. & Vriend, G. New ways to boost molecular dynamics simulations. J. Comput. Chem. 36, 996–1007 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hulme, K. D. et al. A paucigranulocytic asthma host environment promotes the emergence of virulent influenza viral variants. eLife 10, https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.61803 (2021).Kirui, J., Bucci, M. D., Poole, D. S. & Mehle, A. Conserved features of the PB2 627 domain impact influenza virus polymerase function and replication. J. Virol. 88, 5977–5986 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pagadala, N. S., Bhat, R., Kumar D, J. & Landi, A. Discovery of anti-influenza nucleoside triphosphates targeting the catalytic site of A/PR/8/34/H1N1 polymerase. Med. Chem. Res. 29, 1–15 (2020).Article Google Scholar Dias, A. et al. The cap-snatching endonuclease of influenza virus polymerase resides in the PA subunit. Nature 458, 914–918 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kowalinski, E. et al. Structural analysis of specific metal chelating inhibitor binding to the endonuclease domain of influenza pH1N1 (2009) polymerase. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002831 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, N. C. et al. Functional constraint profiling of a viral protein reveals discordance of evolutionary conservation and functionality. PLOS Genet. 11, e1005310 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, H. et al. HDAC6 restricts influenza A virus by deacetylation of the RNA polymerase PA subunit. J. Virol. 93, e01896–18 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gabriel, G. et al. The viral polymerase mediates adaptation of an avian influenza virus to a mammalian host. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 18590–18595 (2005).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Moen, S. O. et al. Structural analysis of H1N1 and H7N9 influenza A virus PA in the absence of PB1. Sci. Rep. 4, 5944 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Goldhill, D. H. et al. The mechanism of resistance to favipiravir in influenza. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 11613–11618 (2018).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, C. et al. Integrating computational modeling and functional assays to decipher the structure-function relationship of influenza virus PB1 protein. Sci. Rep. 4, 7192 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Du, Y. et al. Annotating protein functional residues by coupling high-throughput fitness profile and homologous-structure analysis. mBio 7, e01801–e01816 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dreger, M., Leung, B. W., Brownlee, G. G. & Deng, T. A quantitative strategy to detect changes in accessibility of protein regions to chemical modification on heterodimerization. Protein Sci. 18, 1448–1458 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chu, C. et al. Functional analysis of conserved motifs in influenza virus PB1 protein. PLoS ONE 7, e36113 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kerry, P. S., Willsher, N. & Fodor, E. A cluster of conserved basic amino acids near the C-terminus of the PB1 subunit of the influenza virus RNA polymerase is involved in the regulation of viral transcription. Virology 373, 202–210 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Biswas, S. K. & Nayak, D. P. Mutational analysis of the conserved motifs of influenza A virus polymerase basic protein 1. J. Virol. 68, 1819–1826 (1994).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Ted Dawson, Edward Yeh, and Gerrit Praefcke for providing plasmids. We owe our thanks to Max Trauernicht, Lars Schmitz, Julius Kindsgrab, Josephine Friedrich, Hannah Junginger, Nadja Rotte, Ramona Wördemann, and Josua Janowski for support and Sebastian Giese and Kevin Ciminski for helpful comments and discussions. We are grateful for the support by Geoffrey Chase for editing of the manuscript. This work was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) (Grant BR5189/1-1 to L.B.; LU 477/23-2 to S.L., SCHW 632/21-1 to M.S.) and the Clinical Research Unit CRU342 (Project P6 to L.B. and S.L.; project P4 to A.M.), Further support was received by the Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research (IZKF) (Grant Bru2/015/19 to L.B.) of the Medical Faculty of the University of Muenster and the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF) (Grant 310030_184947 to S.A.L.). We acknowledge support from the Open Access Publication Fund of the University of Muenster.FundingOpen Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.Author informationAuthor notesTim KrischunsPresent address: Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS UMR3569, Unité Biologie des ARN et Virus Influenza, Paris, FranceAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute of Virology Muenster, University of Muenster, Muenster, GermanyFranziska Günl, Tim Krischuns, Lea Henschel, Marius Wahrenburg, Stephan Ludwig & Linda BrunotteInterdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research (IZKF), University of Muenster, Muenster, GermanyFranziska Günl, Alexander Mellmann, Stephan Ludwig & Linda BrunotteInstitute for Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, University of Muenster, Muenster, GermanyJulian A. SchreiberCellular Electrophysiology and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetics of Heart Diseases (IfGH), Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, GermanyJulian A. Schreiber & Guiscard SeebohmDepartment of Orthopedic Oncology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, GermanyMarius WahrenburgBioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Muenster, GermanyHannes C. A. DrexlerDepartment of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandSebastian A. LeidelMultidisciplinary Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandSebastian A. LeidelMax Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Muenster, GermanyVlad CojocaruComputational Structural Biology Group, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The NetherlandsVlad CojocaruSTAR-UBB Institute, Babeş-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, RomaniaVlad CojocaruInstitute of Hygiene, University Hospital Muenster, University of Muenster, Muenster, GermanyAlexander MellmannInstitute of Virology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, GermanyMartin SchwemmleFaculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, GermanyMartin SchwemmleAuthorsFranziska GünlView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTim KrischunsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulian A. SchreiberView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLea HenschelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMarius WahrenburgView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHannes C. A. DrexlerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSebastian A. LeidelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVlad CojocaruView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGuiscard SeebohmView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAlexander MellmannView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMartin SchwemmleView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStephan LudwigView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLinda BrunotteView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsL.B., F.G., and T.K. designed and conceptualized the study. F.G., T.K., L.H., and M.W. performed experiments and functional assays including plasmid cloning, polymerase reconstitution assays, immune fluorescence analysis, viral rescues, and protein interaction studies. T.K., S.L., and H.D. were responsible for protein purification from infected cells and MS analysis. V.C. and L.H. generated the WSN-adapted structure models of the viral polymerase and F.G. performed further structural analysis. In silico dynamic structure modeling of the mutated viral polymerase and viral genome sequencing was performed by J.A.S., G.S., and A.M., respectively. M.S. and S.L. provided laboratory infrastructure, plasmids, and cell lines and supported writing and editing of the manuscript. L.B. and F.G. wrote the first draft of the manuscript and designed the figures with support from all co-authors.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Linda Brunotte.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileDescription of Additional Supplementary FilesSupplementary Data 1Reporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleGünl, F., Krischuns, T., Schreiber, J.A. et al. The ubiquitination landscape of the influenza A virus polymerase. Nat Commun 14, 787 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36389-0Download citationReceived: 21 January 2022Accepted: 30 January 2023Published: 11 February 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36389-0Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Structures of H5N1 influenza polymerase with ANP32B reveal mechanisms of genome replication and host adaptation Ecco StallerLoïc CarriqueErvin Fodor Nature Communications (2024) Dominant HPAIV H5N1 genotypes of Germany 2021/2022 are linked to high virulence in Pekin ducklings Ronja PiescheAngele BreithauptChristian Grund npj Viruses (2024) Cloxyquin activates hTRESK by allosteric modulation of the selectivity filter Julian Alexander SchreiberAnastasia DerksenGuiscard Seebohm Communications Biology (2023) Phosphorylation of the PA subunit of influenza polymerase at Y393 prevents binding of the 5′-termini of RNA and polymerase function Lu LiuRamakanth MadhugiriM. Lienhard Schmitz Scientific Reports (2023) An Influenza A virus can evolve to use human ANP32E through altering polymerase dimerization Carol M. SheppardDaniel H. GoldhillWendy S. Barclay Nature Communications (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchNew compound inhibits influenza virus replica | EurekAlert! Advanced Search Home News Releases Multimedia Meetings Login Register News Release 9-Feb-2023 New compound inhibits influenza virus replication Researchers from the University of Bonn: Derivative of a bacterial natural product blocks endogenous methyltransferase Peer-Reviewed Publication University of Bonn image: The host RNA is methylated by MTr1 to a mature cap1 RNA. The influenza virus snatches the cap part of the mature host RNA to start viral replication. MTr1-deficient cells or cells treated with MTr1 inhibitors do not lead to IAV replication. view more Credit: Image (created with BioRender.com): Yuta Tsukamoto/UKB Viruses use the molecular repertoire of the host cell to replicate. Researchers from the Cluster of Excellence ImmunoSensation2 at the University of Bonn, together with Japanese researchers, want to exploit this for the treatment of influenza. The team led by Prof. Hiroki Kato from the Institute of Cardiovascular Immunology at the University Hospital Bonn has identified a compound that inhibits the body's own methyltransferase MTr1, thereby limiting the replication of influenza viruses. The compound proved effective in lung tissue preparations and mouse studies and showed synergistic effects with already approved influenza drugs. The study is now published in the journal Science. To replicate, viruses need a host cell. There they introduce their genetic information in the form of the nucleic acids DNA or RNA. These molecular blueprints are used in the host cell to produce new viruses. In order to distinguish foreign from its own nucleic acids, the cell uses a kind of labeling system. Own RNA, for example, is tagged with a molecular cap that identifies it as non-hazardous. This enables the immune system to react specifically to threats. The stolen cap The molecular cap is a methylated nucleoside: A small molecule attached to the end of the RNA chain. Tagged in this way, the RNA does not trigger an immune response. However, if there is RNA in the cell that lacks the cap structure, it is recognized by the immune receptor RIG-I, and the immune system is alerted. To escape this, influenza viruses have developed a special mechanism. They steal the molecular cap from cellular RNA molecules and transfer it to their own RNA. This process is called cap-snatching. Influenza requires cellular enzyme for replication The enzyme MTr1 provides cellular mRNA with a cap structure and thus functions as the cell's "nucleic acid labeler". The team led by Prof. Hiroki Kato of the Institute of Cardiovascular Immunology at the University Hospital Bonn has now been able to show how much influenza viruses depend on the function of the enzyme MTr1. "While other viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2, are able to cap their RNA molecules on their own, influenza viruses rely on stealing existing caps," says Yuta Tsukamoto, lead author of the paper. "If the function of MTr1 is disrupted in the cell, there are no caps available to transfer to viral RNA." The activity of MTr1 is thus essential for the replication of the influenza virus in the cell. New inhibitor inhibits virus replication The researchers want to harness this dependence for the treatment of influenza infections. To this end, they searched for inhibitors that specifically inhibit MTr1. The team investigated how the substances in the infected tissue affect the amount of virus particles produced. The researchers tested this both in mouse models and in human lung tissue preparations. These so-called lung explants come from patients who have undergone lung surgery. "Among thousands of candidates, we were able to identify a molecule that inhibits MTr1 in human lung explants and also in vivo in mice, curtailing influenza replication," reports Prof. Hiroki Kato, a member of the Cluster of Excellence ImmunoSensation2 at the University of Bonn. The inhibitor is a derivative of a natural product called trifluoromethyl tubercidin (TFMT), which is produced by bacteria of the genus Streptomyces. "We hope this study will lead to the development of new treatments for influenza," says Prof. Hiroki Kato. In the present study, the researchers were already able to demonstrate that TFMT works together with approved drugs against influenza infections. It was even possible to show a clear synergistic effect with regard to the number of virus particles produced in the tissue. Participating institutions and funding: In addition to the University of Bonn and the University Hospital Bonn, the study involved Hokkaido University (Japan), the National Institute of Infectious Diseases Tokyo (Japan), the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology Tokyo (Japan), the University of Tsukuba (Japan), Aarhus University (Denmark), Academia Sinica Taipei (Taiwan) as well as the Universities of Münster, Marburg and Freiburg, the Technical University of Munich and the German Center for Infection Research (DZIF). The work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). Publication: Yuta Tsukamoto et. al.: Inhibition of cellular RNA methyltransferase abrogates influenza virus capping and replication, DOI: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.add0875 Media contact: Dr. David Fußhöller Cluster of Excellence ImmunoSensation2 University of Bonn Tel. +49 (0)228 287 512 83 E-Mail: david.fusshoeller@uni-bonn.de Journal Science DOI 10.1126/science.add0875 Method of Research Experimental study Subject of Research Human tissue samples Article Title Inhibition of cellular RNA methyltransferase abrogates influenza virus capping and replication. Article Publication Date 9-Feb-2023 Disclaimer: AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert system. Media Contact Johannes Seiler University of Bonn j.seiler@uni-bonn.de Office: 0049-228-734-728 Expert Contact Dr. David Fußhöller University of Bonn david.fusshoeller@uni-bonn.de Office: +49 228 287 512 83 @https:/witter.com/unibonn More on this News Release New compound inhibits influenza virus replication University of Bonn Journal Science DOI 10.1126/science.add0875 Keywords /Health and medicine /Life sciences/Microbiology/Virology/Viruses/Influenza viruses /Life sciences/Cell biology/Cells/Host cells /Scientific community/Research programs/Drug research Original Source https://www.uni-bonn.de/enews/016-2023 Translations auf Deutsch Copyright © 2024 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) facebook.com/EurekAlert @EurekAlert youtube.com/EurekAlert Help / FAQ Services Eligibility Guidelines Contact EurekAlert! Terms & Conditions DMCA Privacy Policy Disclaimer Copyright © 2024 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)Study on the prediction effect of a combined model of SARIMA and LSTM based on SSA for influenza in Shanxi Province, China | BMC Infectious Diseases | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Infectious Diseases Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Join the board Collections Submit manuscript Study on the prediction effect of a combined model of SARIMA and LSTM based on SSA for influenza in Shanxi Province, China Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 06 February 2023 Study on the prediction effect of a combined model of SARIMA and LSTM based on SSA for influenza in Shanxi Province, China Zhiyang Zhao1 na1, Mengmeng Zhai1 na1, Guohua Li2, Xuefen Gao2, Wenzhu Song1, Xuchun Wang1, Hao Ren1, Yu Cui1, Yuchao Qiao1, Jiahui Ren1, Limin Chen3 & …Lixia Qiu1 Show authors BMC Infectious Diseases volume 23, Article number: 71 (2023) Cite this article 2711 Accesses 13 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza is an acute respiratory infectious disease that is highly infectious and seriously damages human health. Reasonable prediction is of great significance to control the epidemic of influenza.MethodsOur Influenza data were extracted from Shanxi Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Seasonal-trend decomposition using Loess (STL) was adopted to analyze the season characteristics of the influenza in Shanxi Province, China, from the 1st week in 2010 to the 52nd week in 2019. To handle the insufficient prediction performance of the seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (SARIMA) model in predicting the nonlinear parts and the poor accuracy of directly predicting the original sequence, this study established the SARIMA model, the combination model of SARIMA and Long-Short Term Memory neural network (SARIMA-LSTM) and the combination model of SARIMA-LSTM based on Singular spectrum analysis (SSA-SARIMA-LSTM) to make predictions and identify the best model. Additionally, the Mean Squared Error (MSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) were used to evaluate the performance of the models.ResultsThe influenza time series in Shanxi Province from the 1st week in 2010 to the 52nd week in 2019 showed a year-by-year decrease with obvious seasonal characteristics. The peak period of the disease mainly concentrated from the end of the year to the beginning of the next year. The best fitting and prediction performance was the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model. Compared with the SARIMA model, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model decreased by 38.12, 17.39 and 21.34%, respectively, in fitting performance; the MSE, MAE and RMSE decreased by 42.41, 18.69 and 24.11%, respectively, in prediction performances. Furthermore, compared with the SARIMA-LSTM model, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model decreased by 28.26, 14.61 and 15.30%, respectively, in fitting performance; the MSE, MAE and RMSE decreased by 36.99, 7.22 and 20.62%, respectively, in prediction performances.ConclusionsThe fitting and prediction performances of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model were better than those of the SARIMA and the SARIMA-LSTM models. Generally speaking, we can apply the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model to the prediction of influenza, and offer a leg-up for public policy. Peer Review reports BackgroundInfluenza, whose incidence often ranks first among notifiable infectious diseases, is an acute respiratory infectious disease caused by the influenza virus, seriously damaging human health [1]. The main clinical manifestations comprise acute high fever, physical pain, and fatigue and are accompanied by respiratory symptoms such as cough or sore throat. However, some special groups, such as infants, pregnant women, the elderly and those with chronic basic diseases are prone to complications and even death. Since the influenza virus is easy to mutate and features easy infection, transmission and diffusion, which leads to outbreaks and epidemics, the occurrence and development of influenza often causes major public health problems [2]. In recent years, global integration has greatly promoted the mobility of groups, which increases the risk of influenza pandemics [3]. Accurate and reasonable prediction provides reliable information and basis for prevention and control, which can enable people to detect abnormal trends in time and contain the epidemic at an early stage, thus reducing human health hazards and economic burdens [4].In the past, linear models such as the grey prediction model [5], the exponential smoothing method [6], the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model and the SARIMA model [7] were often used to predict infectious diseases. The SARIMA model, one of the classical prediction models of infectious diseases, is often used as a benchmark to evaluate many new modelling methods [8]. In 2021, Song used a SARIMA model to predict the incidence of influenza-like illness in high-risk regions in the United States from 2011 to 2020. The results showed that the SARIMA model was suitable for forecasting the ILI incidence of Mississippi [9]. However, these models are constructed by linear information, which show certain limitations in the nonlinear part [10]. Moreover, SARIMA model needs to make the unstable sequence stationary by difference, which will lose certain information and reduce the accuracy of prediction. Therefore, nonlinear models based on machine learning theory, such as Support Vector Machines (SVM) [11], Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) [12], Random Forest (RF) [13] and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [14], are widely used in the field of time series prediction. In 2022, Dai used a hybrid model combining XGBoost, four GARCH models and MLP model (XGBoost-GARCH-MLP) to predict PM concentration values and volatility. The results showed that the combined model based on machine learning was more accurate in predicting PM values [15]. Compared with SARIMA model, RNN has strong nonlinear, mapping and adaptive characteristics, which can effectively improve the prediction accuracy [14]. Moreover, compared with other machine learning models, RNN has a deeper hidden layer and learning ability, which not only ensures the ability to express the nonlinearity of time series, but also considers the time correlation. However, when the time series is long, RNN will suffer from gradient explosion and lack of long-term memory [8]. Long-Short Term Memory Neural Networks (LSTM) introduces a unique memory unit structure, which can make up for the deficiency of RNN and is more suitable for processing long time series data [16]. This property makes it one of the most powerful tools for predicting nonlinear time series in practical applications. In 2017, Li used SVM, Naive Bayes, Decision Tree, Multiple-layer Perceptron, RNN and LSTM to predict the stock data of China from 2008 to 2015. The results showed that Multiple-layer Perceptron, RNN and LSTM were better [17]. In recent years, LSTM and other neural network models have been gradually applied in the field of public health. In 2022, Zhu established a LSTM model to predict the incidence of influenza in Fujian Province, China from 2019 to 2021. The results showed that LSTM had good predictive performance [18]. In 2021, Dai established a deep learning model for an atmospheric pollutant memory network (LSTM) by both applying the one-dimensional multi-scale convolution kernel (ODMSCNN) and a LSTM on the basis of temporal and spatial characteristics. The results showed that the air pollutant concentration prediction model based on ODMSCNN-LSTM had a better prediction effect compared with multi-layer perceptron (MLP), CNN, and LSTM models [19].Time series are usually considered to consist of both linear and nonlinear components [20]. Neither linear model nor nonlinear model can fully capture all the information of time series. Based on this, many scholars have proposed combination models composed of linear and nonlinear models. In 2016, Oliveira proposed the ARIMA-SVR combination model, and the results proved that the hybrid model can effectively improve the prediction accuracy [21]. In 2021, Zhai used the combination model of ARIMA-ERNN and ARIMA-BPNN to predict brucellosis in Shanxi Province, China. The results showed that combination models were better than the single ARIMA model [10]. Nevertheless, the above models all predicted the original series. When the characteristics of the original series are complex, the accuracy of using the combined model directly to predict the original sequence is still insufficient [22].To solve this problem, this research proposed a combination model construction strategy based on decomposition and recombination. Singular spectrum analysis (SSA) can decompose the complex original sequence into some simple and regular sub-sequences [23]. The prediction model can be indirectly established by modeling and superimposing the sub-sequences, which can improve the prediction accuracy of the model. In recent years, the prediction model based on SSA has been gradually applied to public health, stock price prediction and mechanical engineering. In 2021, Mahdi used the SSA method to analyze and predict COVID-19. The results showed that the combined prediction model enjoyed significantly higher accuracy than the single model [24].In 2019, Xiao et al. used SSA to decompose and reconstruct the stock price and forecast it. The results showed that the performance of the combined prediction model was better than the single prediction method [25]. In 2019, Zhang et al. used SSA to decompose and reconstruct the short-term wind power, and modeled and predicted the decomposition sequence respectively to improve the prediction accuracy [26].In this study, the SARIMA model, SARIMA-LSTM model and SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model were established based on the weekly Influenza-Like Illness (ILI) patient ratio from 2010 to 2018 in Shanxi Province to evaluate the fitting effect of the three models. Three models were used to predict the 2019 influenza data, respectively, to evaluate the prediction performance of the three models.The innovation of this paper lies in the establishment of the indirect combination prediction model SSA-SARIMA-LSTM through the idea of decomposition and combination. Compared with single prediction model and direct modeling prediction, SSA-SARIMA-LSTM is more accurate in predicting influenza. This study, more targeted in prevention, and more reasonable in medical resource allocation, will provide more effective theoretical support for the prevention and control of influenza in Shanxi Province, China to effectively reduce the health hazards and economic burden caused by influenza.MethodsData sourcesIn this study, a total of 520 weeks of influenza data from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2019 were obtained from Shanxi Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, China. All cases were diagnosed under the ‘Diagnostic criteria for influenza (WS 285-2008)’ [27]. Influenza data include the number of ILI patients and the total number of outpatient and emergency cases in the same period. To eliminate the difference [28], ILI patient ratio was calculated as$$ILI{\text{\% }} = \frac{the \, number \, of \, ILI \, patients}{{the \, total \, number \, of \, outpatient \, and \, emergency \, cases}}$$ (1) The influenza cases from the 1st week in 2010 to the 52nd week in 2019 were assembled as weekly counts. The weekly ILI% from the 1st week in 2010 to the 52nd week in 2018 were used to build the SARIMA model. The fitted data of the SARIMA model were taken as the input of neural networks, which were divided into two sections: a training set and a verification set. The data from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2017 were used as the training set to construct the neural network, and the data from the 1st week of 2018 to the 52nd week of 2018 were used as the verification set to validate the neural network. The weekly ILI% from the 1st week to the 52nd week of 2019 were used as the test set to test the prediction performance of the three models.Analysis of influenza sequence characteristicsSTL [29] can be used to analyze the long-term trend, seasonal trend and random effect of influenza in Shanxi Province from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2019 as follows:$$Xt = Tt + St + It$$ (2) where Xt is the actual value of ILI% at time t and Tt, St and It are the long-term trends, seasonal trends and random effects, respectively.SARIMA modelSARIMA, a classic model in many time series analyses, is usually constructed as SARIMA (p, d, q) (P, D, Q) s as follows [30]:$$\Theta_{P} (B^{S} )\theta_{p} (B)(1 - B^{S} )^{D} (1 - B)^{d} x_{t} = \Phi_{Q} (B^{S} )\phi_{q} (B)w_{t}$$ (3) where \(\Theta_{P}\), \(\theta_{p}\), \(\Phi_{Q}\) and \(\phi_{q}\) are polynomials of order P, order p, order Q and order q, respectively. p and q represent the order of autoregressive and moving average. d and D represent the order of trend differencing and seasonal differencing. P, Q and s represent the order of seasonal autoregressive, seasonal moving average and seasonal periodicity, respectively. In this study, the weekly ILI% from the 1st week in 2010 to the 52nd week in 2018 were used to build the SARIMA model, and the process included the following steps. First, the stationarity of the sequence was checked by using the Augmented Dickey-fuller (ADF) test, the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin (KPSS) test and the autocorrelation function (ACF) plot. If the p value of the ADF test was less than the significance level, and the autocorrelation coefficient decayed rapidly to 0, the sequence was considered to be stationary. If the p value of the KPSS test was less than the significance level, the sequence was considered to be non-stationary. The Ljung-Box test was used to test whether the sequence was the white noise sequence, and if the p value was less than the significance level, the sequence had no randomness. Second, when the original sequence was stationary and non-random, the model can be directly constructed. When the original sequence was not stable, d or D-order difference was used to make the sequence stable and then constructed the model. Afterwards, Python Grid Search was used to automatically fit the SARIMA model. According to the minimum Akaike information criterion (AIC), the optimal model was selected, and the success of model fitting was judged by the residual white noise test. Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) was used to perform the parameter test of the model [8]. Finally, the data from the 1st week to the 52nd week of 2019 were predicted by this model, and the prediction effect of the model was tested.LSTM modelLSTM hidden layer module, also known as Memory module (A), was shown in Fig. 1. It consists of a cell and three gates: INPUT GATES, FORGET GATES, and OUTPUT GATES [16].Fig. 1The LSTM unit: A is Memory module, a is the forgetting gate, b and c are the input gate, d is the output gateFull size imageThe mathematical formulas of LSTM used in this study are shown as follows [31]. By receiving the output value ht-1 of the previous state and the input value Xt of the current moment, the forgetting gate uses the sigmoid function to determine the retention degree ft of the transmitted information.$$f_{t} = \sigma \left( {W_{fh} h_{t - 1} + W_{fx} x_{t} + b_{f} } \right)$$ (4) The input gate updates the current state Ct by using sigmoid and Tanh functions to pass to the next memory cell.$$i_{t} = \sigma \left( {W_{ih} h_{t - 1} + W_{ix} x_{t} + b_{i} } \right)$$ (5) $$\mathop {C_{t} }\limits^{ \wedge } = \tanh \left( {W_{ch} h_{t - 1} + W_{cx} x_{t} + b_{c} } \right)$$ (6) $$C_{t} = f_{t} C_{t - 1} + i_{t} \mathop {C_{t} }\limits^{ \wedge }$$ (7) The output gate outputs the value ht at the current time.$$o_{t} = \sigma \left( {W_{oh} h_{t - 1} + W_{ox} x_{t} + b_{o} } \right)$$ (8) $$h_{t} = o_{t} \tanh \left( {C_{t} } \right)$$ (9) The model controls the flow of information in memory units and neural networks through the gates. W is the weight matrix. b is the bias term. \(\sigma\) is the sigmoid function. In this paper, LSTM was set to 1000 iterations, batch size was set to 256, the learning rate was 0.001, time step was set to 1, the number of hidden layers was 1, Adam algorithm was adopted to optimize parameters, and other parameters were default. The value range of hidden layer neurons were calculated by the following empirical formula, where m and n are the number of neurons in the input layer and output layer respectively, which we set to 1, and k is a constant between 1 and 10:$$M = \sqrt {m + n} + k$$ (10) SARIMA-LSTM model and prediction process of influenzaThe SARIMA model is suitable for extracting the linear part of the original time series, but it shows certain limitations in the nonlinear part [20]. The LSTM model has the characteristics of strong nonlinearity, mapping and adaptability, which can reduce the error of the SARIMA model. Therefore, the combined model of SARIMA-LSTM was constructed in this study, which can comprehensively improve the prediction accuracy of the model. Figure 2 showed the prediction process of influenza and the construction framework of SARIMA-LSTM model, including four parts: data pre-processing, SARIMA model construction, SARIMA-LSTM model tuning and data prediction. (1) Data processing preparation. Data preprocessing was performed in the original data of influenza, and the data set was divided into training set and test set. The training set, from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2018, was used to construct the optimal SARIMA model. The test set was used to verify the performance of the model. (2) SARIMA model construction. Input the training set into SARIMA to build the optimal SARIMA model. The fitting value was obtained, and the error was calculated by the following formula:$${\text{e}}_{t} = y_{t} - \mathop {L_{t} }\limits^{ \wedge }$$ (11) where \(y_{t}\) is the actual value of the original series, \(\mathop {L_{t} }\limits^{ \wedge }\) is the fitting value of the optimal SARIMA, and \({\text{e}}_{t}\) is the error, also known as the residual. The ILI% data of the first 53 weeks were lost in this step due to a first-order difference and a seasonal difference in the construction of the optimal SARIMA model. The established SARIMA model was used to obtain the fitting values from the 2nd week of 2011 to the 52nd week of 2018. The data from the 2nd week of 2011 to the 52nd week of 2017 were used as the training part of the LSTM model, and the data from the 1st week of 2018 to the 52nd week of 2018 were used as the validation part of the LSTM model. (3) SARIMA-LSTM model tuning. The training part was used as the input, and ILI% at the same time point was used as the output to construct the SARIMA-LSTM model, and the verification part was used to optimize the model. In order to improve model training speed and prediction accuracy, the Min–Max normalization method [30] was used to normalize the original data.$$X^{*} = \frac{{X - X_{\min } }}{{X_{\max } - X_{\min } }}$$ (12) X* is the normalized value of the data, X is the original data, Xmax and Xmin are the maximum and minimum values respectively. Since hidden layer nodes have a great impact on the performance of the model, we chose MSE, MAE and RMSE as the evaluation indexes of network performance. Through experiments, the hidden layer neurons were selected when the smallest MSE, MAE and RMSE to construct the optimal SARIMA-LSTM model. (4) Data prediction. The established SARIMA model was used to predict influenza data from the 1st week to the 52nd week in 2019, and the predicted values were used as the input values of the SARIMA-LSTM model to obtain the output values. The inverse normalization method was used to restore the output values into meaningful data. The predicted values were compared with the real values of the test set to evaluate the Prediction performance of the model. Fig. 2Flow chart of influenza SARIMA-LSTM prediction modelFull size imageSingular spectrum analysisSingular spectrum analysis, proposed by Broomhead and King in 1986, has been widely used in the field of time series decomposition in recent years. By transforming the original sequence into a trajectory matrix for decomposition and reconstruction, SSA can decompose it into the long-term trend, periodic trend and noise, to further forecast. The specific decomposition process is as follows: (1) Embedding. In this paper, the original sequence X = (X1, X2,…, XN) was transformed into a sequence of K vectors with length L(2 ≤ L ≤ 2/N). L is an integer value called window length and K is an integer such that the trajectory matrix includes all values, K = N-L + 1. When the time sequence data has obvious periodic characteristics, the window length is set to an integer multiple of the period which is less than one-third of the total length [23].$$X = \left[ {\begin{array}{*{20}c} {X_{1} } & {X_{2} } & \cdots & {X_{K} } \\ {X_{2} } & {X_{3} } & \cdots & {X_{K + 1} } \\ \vdots & \vdots & {} & \vdots \\ {X_{L} } & {X_{L + 1} } & \cdots & {X_{N} } \\ \end{array} } \right]$$ (13) (2) Singular value decomposition. Let \(S = XX^{T}\),\(U_{1} ,U_{2} , \ldots ,U_{L}\) be the eigenvectors of S, and \(\lambda_{1} \ge \lambda_{2} \ge \cdots \ge \lambda_{L}\), its corresponding eigenvalues. Let \(V_{i} = X^{T} U_{i} /\sqrt {\lambda_{i} }\),\(U_{i}\) and \(V_{i}\) be the left and right singular vectors of matrix X respectively, and \(\sqrt {\lambda_{i} } (i = 1,2, \ldots L)\), its corresponding singular values. At this time, X can be expressed as X = E1 + E2 + … + EL, and \(E_{i} = \sqrt {\lambda_{i} } U_{i} V_{i}^{T} \left( {i = 1,2, \ldots ,L} \right)\). (3) Grouping and diagonal averaging. We divided X into r disjoint subsets according to the contribution rate of singular values (\(X = E_{{I_{1} }} + E_{{I_{2} }} + \ldots + E_{{I_{{\text{p}}} }}\)). Then, using anti-diagonal averaging, we transformed the new trajectory matrix (\(E_{{I_{1} }} ,E_{{I_{2} }} , \ldots ,E_{{I_{p} }}\)) into new sequences of length N and total number p. Finally, the original sequence X was decomposed into p subsequences with length N, and the sum of subsequences was X.$$e_{k} = \left\{ {\begin{array}{*{20}c} {\frac{1}{k}\sum\limits_{p = 1}^{k} {e_{p,k - p + 1}^{ * } } } & {{\text{for }}(1 \le k \le m^{ * } )} \\ \begin{gathered} \frac{1}{{m^{ * } }}\sum\limits_{p = 1}^{{m^{ * } }} {e_{p,k - p + 1}^{ * } } \hfill \\ \frac{1}{N - k + 1}\sum\limits_{{p = k - n^{ * } + 1}}^{{N - n^{ * } + 1}} {e_{p,k - p + 1}^{ * } } \hfill \\ \end{gathered} & \begin{gathered} {\text{for }}(m^{ * } \le k \le n^{ * } ) \hfill \\ {\text{for }}(n^{ * } \le k \le N) \hfill \\ \end{gathered} \\ \end{array} } \right.$$ (14) E is a matrix(m × n), \(m^{*} = \min \left\{ {m,n} \right\}\),\(n^{*} = \max \left\{ {m,n} \right\}\),N is the total number of inverse diagonals N = m + n-1, k = 1,2,…,N. According to the above formulas, E is transformed into a one-dimensional time series \(e_{1} ,e_{2} , \ldots ,e_{N}\) [32]. SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model and prediction process of influenzaIt is difficult for a single model to capture the comprehensive characteristics of signals for accurate prediction. Therefore, we proposed an indirect prediction method based on SSA. Compared with the SARIMA-LSTM model, the construction of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model added the sequence decomposition step and the sequence combination step (Fig. 3). (1) Data processing preparation and decomposition. First, we used SSA to transform the original sequence from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2018 into multiple simple subsequences. The partitioning process of data sets was consistent with the SARMI-LSTM model. (2) SARIMA-LSTM model building. Second, we constructed the SARIMA-LSTM model for each subsequence. (3) Data prediction. Third, the optimal SARIMA model prediction values of each subsequence from the 1st week to the 52nd week in 2019 were taken as the input values of the model to obtain the output prediction values, and the inverse normalization method was used to restore the output prediction values of the subseries to meaningful data. (4) Sequence combination. Finally, the predicted values of each subsequence were added to obtain the predicted values of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model from the 1st week to the 52nd week in 2019. The predicted values were compared with the real values of the test set to evaluate the Prediction performance of the model. Fig. 3Flow chart of influenza SSA-SARIMA-LSTM prediction model. The sequence decomposition step and the sequence combination step are surrounded by dashed linesFull size imageIndicators of model performanceThree performance indexes, MSE, MAE and RMSE, were used to assess the fitting and prediction effects of those models.$$MSE = \frac{1}{N}\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{N} {\left( {X_{k} - \mathop {X_{k} }\limits^{ \wedge } } \right)^{2} }$$ (15) $$MAE = \frac{1}{N}\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{N} {\left| {X_{k} - \mathop {X_{k} }\limits^{ \wedge } } \right|}$$ (16) $$RMSE = \sqrt {\frac{1}{N}\sum\limits_{k = 1}^{N} {(X_{k} - \mathop {X_{k} }\limits^{ \wedge } )^{2} } }$$ (17) \(X_{{\text{k}}}\) is the actual value at time k. \(\mathop {X_{{\text{k}}} }\limits^{ \wedge }\) is the predicted value of the model. N is the sample size.Data analysisExcel software version 2021 was used for data collection and collation, Anaconda software version 4.10.3 was used to establish STL, the SARIMA model, the SARIMA-LSTM combined model and the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM combined model. MATLAB software version 2019 was used for SSA.ResultsSeasonal characteristics of influenzaSTL was used to study the time series of ILI% in Shanxi Province from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2019, and the results were shown in Fig. 4. The original data, long-term trends, seasonal trends and residuals were shown from top to bottom. Based on the long-term trends, Influenza in Shanxi Province decreased year by year. The seasonal trends revealed that the Influenza in Shanxi Province showed obvious seasonality and periodicity, with a cycle of 1 year (52 weeks). In a cycle, the peak of influenza in Shanxi Province, China was mainly at the beginning and end of the year.Fig. 4Seasonal decomposition based on STL of the influenza in Shanxi Province from 2010 to 2019Full size imageSARIMA modelWeekly ILI% from the 1st week in 2010 to the 52nd week in 2018 in Shanxi Province were used to build the SARIMA model. The ACF of the original series showed obvious seasonal characteristics (Fig. 5). The ADF test: t = − 5.249, P < 0.001, and the KPSS test: χ2 = 1.251, P = 0.010, and the Ljung-Box test: χ2 = 352.724, P < 0.001. Therefore, the original sequence was non-stationary and non-random. The original series became stationary after the first-order difference and a seasonal difference, and the adjusted sequence was not a random effect (Table 1). Finally, SARIMA (p,1,q) (P,1,Q) 52 was preliminarily selected.Fig. 5Autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation plots: A is the original time series, and B is the adjusted time seriesFull size imageTable 1 ADF, KPSS and Ljung-Box tests of the time seriesFull size tableBy using Python grid to search the minimum AIC, we finally determined the SARIMA (2,1,1) (2,1,0) 52 model (AIC = 95.163). The parameters of the SARIMA (2,1,1) (2,1,0) 52 model were statistically significant and that the residual sequence of the model was a random sequence (χ2 = 0.020, P = 0.900) (Table 2).Table 2 Model parameter estimationFull size tableSARIMA-LSTM modelThe fitted values of the SARIMA (2,1,1) (2,1,0) 52 model from the 2nd week of 2011 to the 52nd week of 2017 were used as inputs, and the actual values at the same time were used as outputs to establish the SARIMA-LSTM model. The data from weeks 1 through 52 of 2018 were used to verify the neural network. According to the formula (10), the hidden layer neurons of the SARIMA-LSTM were between 2 and 12. Through experiments, when the hidden layer neuron was 4, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the verification set reached the minimum; that is, the number of hidden layers of the model was set to 1 and the nodes were set to 4, (Table 3). Finally, the predicted values of the SARIMA (2,1,1) (2,1,0) 52 model from weeks 1 through 52 of 2019 were used as the inputs. The established SARIMA-LSTM model was used to obtain the output predicted values, and the inverse normalization was performed.Table 3 Validation set error of the SARIMA-LSTM modelFull size tableSSA-SARIMA-LSTM modelThe original influenza sequence in Shanxi Province was complex, and the accuracy of direct prediction was insufficient. In this study, SSA was used to decompose the ILI% of 468 weeks in Shanxi Province from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2018, and multiple simple and regular subsequences were obtained. The SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model was obtained by building the SARIMA-LSTM model for the subsequences.SSAL (window length) and r (reconstruction number) should be determined, before the SSA decomposition. First, L was set to 52 due to the cyclical nature of influenza. Afterwards, we obtained 52 singular values which were from large to small by using SSA. The contribution rate of the first singular value was the largest (90.86%), 2–6 followed (6.93%), and the contribution rate of 7–52 was the smallest (2.18%). The matrices corresponding to the singular values of 1, 2–6 and 7–52 were grouped and reconstructed into three subsequences RC1, RC2-6 and RC7-52 by diagonal averaging. The three subsequences showed different characteristics: RC1 showed a gradual downward trend, RC2-6 showed periodic fluctuation, and RC7-52 fluctuated around the mean with no obvious trend (Fig. 6).Fig. 6SSA reconstructionFull size imageConstructing SSA-SARIMA-LSTM modelSSA was used to reconstruct the original influenza sequence into three subsequences with different periodicity and stability. Afterwards, we tested the stationarity and white noise of each subsequence. The three original subsequences were non-random. RC1 became stationary after the second-order difference, and RC2–6 became stationary after the seasonal difference. RC7-52 was a stationary sequence. By using Python grid to search the minimum AIC, SARIMA (2,2,0) (0,0,0)52, SARIMA (2,0,2) (0,1,0)52 and SARIMA (2,0,2) (2,0,0)52 were used to fit RC1, RC2–6 and RC7–52, respectively (Table 4). Consistent with the construction method of the SARIMA-LSTM model, the number of hidden layers of the models was set to 1 and the hidden layer neurons of RC1, RC2–6 and RC7–52 sequences were 11, 11 and 7, respectively (Table 5). The SARIMA-LSTM models were used to predict the ILI% of subsequences from weeks 1 through 52 of 2019, and the predicted values of subsequences were added to obtain the predicted values of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model.Table 4 Model parameter estimation of the subsequencesFull size tableTable 5 Validation set error of the subsequencesFull size tableComparison of the three modelsThe SARIMA model, the SARIMA-LSTM model and the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model were used to predict the ILI% in Shanxi Province from the 1st week of 2019 to the 52nd week. The predicted and fit values of the three models and the ILI% were shown in Fig. 7. To objectively evaluate the model performance, the fitting and prediction performances of the three models were compared by MSE, MAE and RMSE (Table 6). Compared with the SARIMA model, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the SARIMA-LSTM model decreased by 13.75, 3.26 and 7.13%, respectively, in fitting performance; the MSE, MAE and RMSE decreased by 8.60, 12.36 and 4.39%, respectively, in prediction performances. Compared with the SARIMA model, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model decreased by 38.12, 17.39 and 21.34%, respectively, in fitting performance; the MSE, MAE and RMSE decreased by 42.41, 18.69 and 24.11%, respectively, in prediction performances. Compared with the SARIMA-LSTM model, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model decreased by 28.26, 14.61 and 15.30%, respectively, in fitting performance; the MSE, MAE and RMSE decreased by 36.99, 7.22 and 20.62%, respectively, in prediction performance.Fig. 7The fitted and predicted values of the three models. A was the fitting part, and B was the prediction partFull size imageTable 6 Comparison of the three models in fitting and prediction performancesFull size tableDiscussionAs the influenza virus is prone to mutation, it is highly vulnerable to an epidemic, even a worldwide pandemic, which will increase the burden on health services and economic losses [33]. It’s the key to preventing and controlling the harm of influenza which requires a timely understanding of the epidemic trend of influenza and early detection of the epidemic situation. ILI% in Shanxi Province showed a downward trend from the 1st week of 2010 to the 52nd week of 2019, and the analysis of Seasonal decomposition based on STL (Fig. 4) showed significant seasonal characteristics. The peak was mainly concentrated at the beginning and end of each year, which was a typical characteristic of the influenza epidemic in Northern China. The main reason may be related to the cold and dry weather in winter. Low temperature makes the virus stay alive longer, and low humidity makes the virus stay in the air longer, both of which increase the susceptibility of influenza to cause a high incidence of influenza [34]. Therefore, it is necessary to strengthen education attainment, raise awareness of prevention and encourage influenza vaccination to avoid the economic and disease burden caused by influenza.Many factors influence the occurrence of influenza, and it is difficult to collect data on influencing factors. Facing this situation, time series prediction model attributes all the complex external factors to the time factors and predicts the future incidence to overcome the disadvantages of traditional mathematical-statistical methods. The SARIMA model, one of the most classical time series methods in infectious disease prediction, has been proven to have high accuracy, and it’s often used as the evaluation basic for new models [7]. Therefore, we established the optimal model SARIMA (2,1,1) (2,1,0) 52 as the basic model to evaluate the performance of other models. However, the results showed that the prediction performance of the optimal model SARIMA (2,1,1) (2,1,0) 52 still had some deficiencies. The possible reason was that influenza, like most infectious diseases, was a combination of linear and nonlinear sequences [10]. The SARIMA model can accurately extract the linear components of the time series, but it has some limitations when dealing with nonlinear information. The LSTM has strong nonlinearity, mapping and self-adaptability, which can effectively improve the prediction accuracy. In this paper, we used influenza data to compare the performances of the SARIMA, SARIMA-LSTM and SSA-SARIMA-LSTM models in fitting and prediction. The study found that compared with the SARIMA model, the MSE, MAE and RMSE of the SARIMA-LSTM and SSA-SARIMA-LSTM models had different degrees of decline in terms of fitting and prediction performances. The possible reason was that the combined models made up for the lack of nonlinear mapping ability of the SARIMA model and improved the prediction performance, consistent with the research results of other scholars [10, 30]. All the above models directly predicted the original series. However, the influenza series were non-stationary, with obvious seasonality, trend and other complex temporal characteristics, and the prediction accuracy of direct modeling was insufficient. Based on this, The SSA was used to decompose the original influenza sequence, and the SARIMA-LSTM model was used to predict the subsequences respectively, and the final predicted values were obtained by superposition to establish the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model. The results showed that the fitting and prediction performances of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model were the best, which may be due to the fact that the original sequence was decomposed into relatively simple, stable and regular subsequences. It was easier for the model to fit the regular subsequences, thus improving the prediction accuracy, which was also consistent with the results of Kalantari [35].To the best of our knowledge, we are the first one to explore the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM combination model based on SSA for predicting the incidence of Influenza. Its advantage is that the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model combines the advantages of the SARIMA in linear features and a neuron network in nonlinear features and enhances the capability of a single SARIMA. At the same time, the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model based on decomposition and recombination can make up for the lack of accuracy of direct use of the original sequence prediction. Second, we selected the optimal SARIMA model by using Python Grid Search to automatically search the minimum AIC, which made the model more accurate and suitable for analyzing influenza data. Third, the use of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model helps rationalize the allocation of limited public health resources and the early prevention to control influenza.However, there are also some limitations. First, the patterns and the incidence of influenza vary from region to region [2]. It needs further study whether the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model is suitable for other areas. Second, this study only established two combination models, and the superiority of SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model and other models remained to be verified. In the future, the influence factors of influenza will be incorporated into the model and we will compare the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model with other models. In the future, we plan to use different signal decomposition methods and more neural networks to improve the accuracy of influenza prediction. At the same time, we will use this model to study the predictive performance of influenza in different regions.ConclusionsIn this study, the time series of influenza in Shanxi Province from 2010 to 2019 showed obvious seasonal characteristics and a trend of decreasing. The fitting and prediction performances of the SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model were better than those of the SARIMA-LSTM and SARIMA models, and the SARIMA-LSTM model was better than the SARIMA model. The SSA-SARIMA-LSTM model was more suitable for predicting the incidence of influenza than the SARIMA-LSTM and SARIMA models. Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. ReferencesLabella AM, et al. Influenza. J. Med Clin North Am. 2013;97:621–45.Article Google Scholar Keilman LJ, et al. Seasonal Influenza (Flu). J Nurs Clin North Am. 2019;54:227–43.Article Google Scholar Saunders-Hastings PR, et al. Reviewing the history of pandemic influenza: understanding patterns of emergence and transmission. J Pathogens. 2016;5:66.Article Google Scholar Zheng Y, et al. Study on the relationship between the incidence of influenza and climate indicators and the prediction of influenza incidence. J Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2021;28:473–81.Article CAS Google Scholar Yang X, et al. The analysis of GM (1, 1) grey model to predict the incidence trend of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers in Wuhan City. China J Med. 2018;97:e11787. Google Scholar Mahajan S, et al. Short-Term PM2.5 forecasting using exponential smoothing method: a comparative analysis. J Sensors Basel. 2018;18:3223.Article Google Scholar Brian K, et al. Time series analysis using autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models. J Acad Emerg Med. 1998;5:1553–2712. Google Scholar Mbah TJ, et al. Using LSTM and ARIMA to Simulate and Predict Limestone Price Variations. J Min Metall Explor. 2021;38:913–26. Google Scholar Song Z, et al. Spatio-Temporal Analysis of Influenza-Like Illness and Prediction of Incidence in High-Risk Regions in the United States from 2011 to 2020. J Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18:7120.Article Google Scholar Zhai M, et al. Research on the predictive effect of a combined model of ARIMA and neural networks on human brucellosis in Shanxi Province, China: a time series predictive analysis. J BMC Infect Dis. 2021;21:280.Article Google Scholar Zhou J, et al. Establishment of a SVM classifier to predict recurrence of ovarian cancer. J Mol Med Rep. 2018;18:3589–98.CAS Google Scholar Menon R, et al. Multivariate adaptive regression splines analysis to predict biomarkers of spontaneous preterm birth. J Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2014;93:382–91.Article Google Scholar Yang L, et al. Study of cardiovascular disease prediction model based on random forest in eastern China. J Sci Rep. 2020;10:5245.Article CAS Google Scholar Dai X, et al. A recurrent neural network using historical data to predict time series indoor PM2.5 concentrations for residential buildings. J Indoor Air. 2021;31:1228–37.Article CAS Google Scholar Hongbin D, et al. PM2.5 volatility prediction by XGBoost-MLP based on GARCH models. J Cleaner Product. 2022;356:131898.Article Google Scholar Yu Y, et al. A review of recurrent neural networks: LSTM cells and network architectures. J Neural Comput. 2019;31:1235–70.Article Google Scholar Wei L, et al. A Comparative Study on Trend Forecasting Approach for Stock Price Time Series. In: Proceedings of 2017 11th IEEE International Conference on Anti-counterfeiting, Security, and Identification (ASID). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. p. 84–88.Zhu H, et al. Study on the influence of meteorological factors on influenza in different regions and predictions based on an LSTM algorithm. J BMC Public Health. 2022;22:2335.Article Google Scholar Hongbin D, et al. Prediction of Air Pollutant Concentration Based on One-Dimensional Multi-Scale CNN-LSTM Considering Spatial-Temporal Characteristics: A Case Study of Xi’an. China J Atmosphere. 2021;12:1626. Google Scholar Peter G, et al. Time series forecasting using a hybrid ARIMA and neural network model. J Neurocomputing. 2003;50:159–75.Article Google Scholar Oliveira C, et al. A hybrid evolutionary decomposition system for time series forecasting. J Neurocomputing. 2016;180:27–34.Article Google Scholar Hibon M, et al. To combine or not to combine: selecting among forecasts and their combinations. J Int J Forecast. 2005;21:15–24.Article Google Scholar Hossein H, et al. Singular spectrum analysis: methodology and comparison. J Data Sci. 2007;5:396. Google Scholar Nader A, et al. Forecasting the COVID-19 Pandemic in Saudi Arabia using a modified singular spectrum analysis approach: model development and data analysis. J JMIRx med. 2021;2:21044.Article Google Scholar Jihong X, et al. A new approach for stock price analysis and prediction Based on SSA and SVM. Int J Inf Technol Decis Making. 2019;18:22. Google Scholar Zhang Y, et al. A novel combination forecasting model for wind power integrating least square support vector machine, deep belief network, singular spectrum analysis and locality-sensitive hashing. J Energy. 2019;168:558–72.Article Google Scholar Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic of China. WS 285–2008 diagnostic criteria for innuenza. Beijing: People’s Health Publishing House;2008.Zhang J, et al. A comparative study on predicting influenza outbreaks. J Biosci Trends. 2017;11:533–41.Article Google Scholar Sanchez-Vazquez MJ, et al. Using seasonal-trend decomposition based on loess (STL) to explore temporal patterns of pneumonic lesions in finishing pigs slaughtered in England, 2005–2011. J Prev Vet Med. 2012;104:65–73.Article Google Scholar Wu W, et al. Time series analysis of human brucellosis in mainland China by using Elman and Jordan recurrent neural networks. J BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19:414.Article Google Scholar Song W, et al. A Time Series Data Filling Method Based on LSTM-Taking the Stem Moisture as an Example. J Sensors. 2020;20:5045.Article Google Scholar Sanei S, et al. A new adaptive line enhancer based on singular spectrum analysis. J IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2012;59:428–34.Article Google Scholar Horm SV, et al. Epidemiological and virological characteristics of influenza viruses circulating in Cambodia from 2009 to 2011. J PLoS One. 2014;9:e110713.Article Google Scholar Zhang Y, et al. The complex associations of climate variability with seasonal influenza A and B virus transmission in subtropical Shanghai. China J Sci Total Environ. 2020;701:134607.Article CAS Google Scholar Kalantari M, et al. Forecasting COVID-19 pandemic using optimal singular spectrum analysis. J Chaos Solitons Fractals. 2021;142:110547.Article Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsNot applicable.FundingThis study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Project (Grant Number: 81973155). The funders had no role in the design of the study and collection, analysis, and interpretation of data and in writing the manuscript.Author informationAuthor notesZhiyang Zhao and Mengmeng Zhai contributed equally to this work.Authors and AffiliationsDepartment of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, ChinaZhiyang Zhao, Mengmeng Zhai, Wenzhu Song, Xuchun Wang, Hao Ren, Yu Cui, Yuchao Qiao, Jiahui Ren & Lixia QiuShanxi Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Taiyuan, 030012, Shanxi, ChinaGuohua Li & Xuefen GaoShanxi Provincial Peoples Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi, ChinaLimin ChenAuthorsZhiyang ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMengmeng ZhaiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGuohua LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXuefen GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWenzhu SongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXuchun WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHao RenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYu CuiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYuchao QiaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJiahui RenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLimin ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLixia QiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsZYZ, MMZ analyzed and interpreted the data, and are major contributors in writing the manuscript; GHL, XFG collected data; WZS, XCW, HR were responsible for preprocessing the data; YC, YCQ, JHR were responsible for checking the results; LXQ, LMC gave constructive suggestions for the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Limin Chen or Lixia Qiu.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate This study did not involve any human trials. The use of influenza data was approved by the Ethics Committee at Shanxi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, China. The need of informed consent was deemed unnecessary by the Ethics Review Board of the Shanxi Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, because the data did not contain personal and health information that could be connected back to the original identifiers. The data used in this study was anonymized before its use. Consent to publish Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZhao, Z., Zhai, M., Li, G. et al. Study on the prediction effect of a combined model of SARIMA and LSTM based on SSA for influenza in Shanxi Province, China. BMC Infect Dis 23, 71 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-023-08025-1Download citationReceived: 19 September 2022Accepted: 23 January 2023Published: 06 February 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-023-08025-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsInfluenzaSARIMA modelLSTM modelSSAPredicting Download PDF Advertisement BMC Infectious Diseases ISSN: 1471-2334 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.Avian influenza factsheet - NIPH Skip to main content Avian influenza Published 11.02.2014 | Updated 09.02.2023 Go to top Address/contact Norwegian Institute of Public Health Switchboard: (+47) 21 07 70 00Org. no. 983 744 516 Contact us Latest News by year Divisions and departments Would you like to work at the NIPH? All our Studies Projects Publications Health registries Content A-Z About the Norwegian Institute of Public Health Privacy PolicyTaking Lessons From Pennsylvania’s First Avian Influenza Case in Nearly 40 Years | Poultry News | lancasterfarming.com Skip to main content You are the owner of this article. Edit Article Add New Article Close You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Subscribe Today Mailbox Markets Register Log In My Account Log Out Site search Search Home E-Newspaper Archives Advertising Media Kit E-Newsletters Market Reports Business Directory Weather Farming News News Dairy Livestock Poultry Field Crops Produce Hemp Conservation Organic Ag Business Equipment & Machinery Country Life Family Food & Recipes Antiques & History Mid-Atlantic Horse Youth Gardening Outdoors Fairs & Shows Farmhouse Podcast Buy & Sell Mailbox Markets Classifieds Auctions Polls Merchandise Store Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Lancaster Farming P.O. Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 (717) 394-3047 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn TikTok Instagram Site search Search Subscribe Log In My Account Log Out Farming News Country Life Classifieds Auctions Mailbox Markets Taking Lessons From Pennsylvania’s First Avian Influenza Case in Nearly 40 Years Share this Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link LancasterFarming e-Newspapers November 11, 2024 52° 52° Close Taking Lessons From Pennsylvania’s First Avian Influenza Case in Nearly 40 Years Philip Gruber, pgruber@lancasterfarming.com Feb 8, 2023 Feb 8, 2023 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link STATE COLLEGE, Pa. — Avian influenza stole quietly into Kreider Farms.Just after Palm Sunday last spring, an unusual number of birds died at one of the company’s Lancaster County egg operations.By the end of the week, lab testing had confirmed Pennsylvania’s first case of highly pathogenic avian influenza in almost 40 years, and workers in coveralls and masks had begun the sad task of killing 1.3 million birds. Byron Shaffer, director of food safety and quality assurance at Kreider Farms, spoke Feb. 8 at the Pennsylvania Dairy Summit about the outbreak and lessons learned.Shaffer was aware of the threat avian influenza posed well before last spring’s infection.In the 1980s, Lancaster County was devastated by a two-year outbreak of the disease. And when avian influenza hit the Midwest even harder in 2015, Shaffer quickly developed a biosecurity plan for the farm, detailing how the farm would respond to a disease outbreak, including depopulation and disposal methods.By the time avian influenza again began popping up in the U.S. early last year, Shaffer knew what he might do if any of the company’s farms were affected.Kreider has six sites with at least 6 million laying hens in Lancaster, Lebanon and Dauphin counties.One is a five-building complex in East Donegal Township, where 178 birds died in the middle house April 11, the Monday before Easter, last year.The weather had been rainy and unseasonably warm, not ideal for bird health. The house had 420,000 laying hens that were 64 weeks old.“At that age, you’re concerned about that type of mortality, but you’re not thinking high-path(ogenic) avian influenza,” Shaffer said.The company brought in a team of veterinarians to investigate, who at first thought a stuck ventilation inlet might be the culprit. But deaths continued to mount, and Shaffer decided he would send samples to the state vet lab if the situation had worsened by Thursday.Shaffer walked into the farm that morning to find almost 1,000 birds dead, and he called the state Ag Department at 6:30, as dawn was breaking over the trees along Donegal Creek.Some at the farm were still holding out hope that the problem was coryza, that the biosecurity plan would bulletproof the farm against the disease.Even so, Shaffer started preparations for killing the flocks, as is required in avian influenza outbreaks.“I think all of us knew what was about to happen,” he said.By 9 p.m., the lab had issued the dread diagnosis, and Shaffer had all the approvals needed to depopulate.“We knew, based upon what we were seeing with the trends, that this was going to get very ugly and the birds were going to suffer. And the humane thing to do was to bring them down,” Shaffer said.Under the supervision of a USDA veterinarian, the farm used Ventilation Shutdown Plus, in which air exchange in the house is cut off and the thermostat is cranked up. All the birds were dead by 11:30. In half an hour it was Good Friday.The other four houses at the Donegal farm were depopulated over the sacred weekend, the last on Resurrection Sunday itself.As disheartening as the depopulation was, the swift action protected the birds from further suffering and prevented the disease from spreading to other farms.“That was the right thing to do,” Shaffer said.Avian influenza can multiply rapidly in live birds.The Donegal farm had 75 employees, many of them long-timers, in animal care and processing.The workers were involved in the cleanup at the complex and then were transferred to other Kreider complexes until Donegal was restocked July 29 — with birds raised at a pullet farm 200 yards away that never got infected.Kreider did not furlough any employees, a situation Shaffer acknowledged smaller farms might not be able to match.Still, the workers took the birds’ deaths hard, and staff had to sit with some and help them work through their emotions.“The birds recognize them in the barns. You know that. You see it,” Shaffer said. “And so as much as it hits some of the leadership, imagine working inside of a flock of birds every day that you’ve done everything you can to take care of, and now that barn has to be depopulated.”Soon after depopulation, the 1.3 million dead birds were moved into the houses’ manure sheds. There the leachate could be controlled while the farm prepared for disposal.Kreider’s biosecurity plan originally called for the carcasses to be buried, but the state wasn’t ready to approve that.Instead, the farm composted the birds in 15 acres of windrows behind the poultry houses. The process used 275 trailer loads of mulch, and most of the piles are still there.The 25 trailer loads of eggs at the farm eventually went to Reinford Farms’ methane digester in Mifflintown.The hitch with disposal shows that farms should include backup strategies in their biosecurity plans, Shaffer said.Coordinating ResponseJennifer Reed-Harry, assistant vice president of PennAg Industries Association, found the Kreider Farms outbreak similarly overwhelming. Jennifer Reed-Harry, assistant vice president of PennAg Industries Association, speaks about avian influenza at the Pennsylvania Dairy Summit on Feb. 8, 2023 at The Penn Stater in State College, Pa. She is joined by David Wolfgang, left, a temporary assistant state veterinarian, and Byron Shaffer, director of food safety and quality assurance at Kreider Farms. PHILIP GRUBER | staff Her first indication that something was wrong came April 13, when poultry people began dispersing early from the agribusiness group’s annual banquet. As it happened, the gathering was just 7 miles from the infected farm.When Reed-Harry got the call about Kreider Farms, her mind began racing with the questions she needed to answer as the liaison between industry and the state. Where would equipment and supplies come from, and how quickly could they arrive?She found many allies. Environmental agencies agreed not to inspect any farms in the affected area. The state trucking association warned its members, and the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Association informed package delivery companies.The Center for Poultry and Livestock Excellence, housed at PennAg, ran ads in Lancaster Farming to keep farmers informed about outbreaks and steps to take.Avian influenza detections peaked last spring and fall. They are beginning again as wild waterfowl — natural carriers of the disease — begin migrating. Starting with the Kreider case, Pennsylvania has racked up almost 40 infected premises and lost more than 4 million birds.To underscore the importance of reporting poultry illness and deaths to the state, the center for excellence is doing further outreach this spring to Plain Sect farmers.“If their birds were sick, they didn’t really want to talk about that, because they knew they’d need to depop, and their neighbor might get it, and that would cause an economic hardship to their community,” Reed-Harry said.Takeaways for DairyWhile poultry and pig farms have much stricter biosecurity, dairy farms should still take steps to prevent disease on their farms.That message was a big reason Dairy Summit devoted a plenary session to a chicken disease.Actions that keep pathogens from entering or leaving a farm are a buffer against both rare, ruinous diseases and more familiar problems, said David Wolfgang, a temporary assistant state veterinarian. Such protocols improve herd health,“A good biosecurity plan would be, really, money in the bank,” he said.Dairy farms haven’t had a huge disease outbreak since 1909, so complacency is their biggest risk, Wolfgang said. With the pace of global trade, foot and mouth disease could easily arrive in the U.S., where it could cause a $50 billion disaster.“It would probably move across the United States faster than we could get our arms around it,” Wolfgang said.The time to prepare is before the disease arrives. The outbreak itself will be the most stressful time in a farmer’s life, and there won’t be time to build a plan from scratch in the heat of the moment, Reed-Harry said.For dairy farmers, the Secure Milk Supply Plan is the place to start when developing a biosecurity plan. Newsletter Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Breaking News Breaking news, sent straight to your inbox. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up By opting into newsletters you are agreeing to our privacy policy. From Our Partners What To Read Next Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link Lancaster Farming's Ongoing Avian Influenza Coverage Highly pathogenic avian influenza is an ongoing problem. Lancaster Farming is tracking outbreaks, providing management information and coverin… Optimize a Space Outside Your Poultry House for Better Biosecurity Prevent bacteria and viruses from hitching a ride into your poultry houses by creating a space devoted to biosecurity. More information Green Dragon Auction Under Bird Ban as Avian Flu Returns to Pennsylvania Due to recent USDA-confirmed cases of avian influenza in the area, the Green Dragon Small Animal Auction will likely be without birds for another month. Pennsylvania Has First Avian Influenza Cases of Year A Lancaster County duck flock has been depopulated because of avian influenza, Pennsylvania’s first outbreak in a year of high risk. Kreider Farms Loses 1.4M Birds to Avian Influenza [Updated] HARRISBURG, Pa. — Pennsylvania recorded its first on-farm case of highly pathogenic avian influenza in nearly 40 years last week, and the Unit… Egg Farmer Recalls Avian Flu Nightmare in Iowa LANCASTER, Pa. — When bird flu forced Mark Van Oort to oversee the depopulation of 7 million chickens this spring, he searched in vain for an … Shared Values Help Farm Families Work Through Disagreements “We’ve got to stop being stubborn with each other, and we’ve got to start being stubborn with the habits that make a farm and a farm family successful,” said Andy Junkin, a farm succession mediator. Avian Influenza Driving Demand for Layer Chicks Layer chick hatcheries are struggling to keep up with flock losses from avian influenza and increased demand from people wanting their own backyard flocks. Delmarva’s $4.8 Billion Chicken Industry Was Accidentally Hatched 100 Years Ago Throughout 2023, the Delmarva Chicken Association will be celebrating 100 years of operations, which all started with a mistaken delivery. Lancaster Broiler Flock Tests Positive for Avian Influenza A chicken farm in Strasburg, Pennsylvania, has tested positive for avian influenza. A Year Into Avian Influenza Outbreak, Pennsylvania Looking to Wind Down Again Many of the control areas have been lifted for farms infected in February and March, and the rest could be lifted by April 19. Tags Lfavianflu Agriculture The Economy Job Market Veterinary Science Trade Construction Industry Industry Sociology Newsletter Philip Gruber Phil Gruber is the Print Content Manager at Lancaster Farming. He can be reached at 717-721-4427 or pgruber@lancasterfarming.com. Author email Sign up for our e-Newsletters! Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Lancaster Farming News Breaking News Country Life Dairy News Field Crops News Industrial Hemp News Livestock News Mid-Atlantic Horse News Poultry News You must select at least one email list. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up Sections News Farming News Country Life Classifieds Business Directory Auctions Mailbox Markets Ancestry Archives Quick Links Subscribe Submit a Classified Liner Ad Contacts Advertising Media Kit Where to Buy Manage Subscription Merchandise Store CONTACT US LancasterFarming.com 21 W Main St, PO Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 Phone: (717) 394-3047 Email: Farming@LancasterFarming.com Follow Us Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube TikTok Pinterest Instagram × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox Copyright © 2024 Lancaster Farming Privacy PolicyTerms of UseCareers ;Bird flu in humans: How worried should we be? | The Week TheWeek The Week US EditionUSUK SUBSCRIBE & SAVE Less than $3 per week × Search Sign in View Profile Sign out The Explainer Talking Points The Week Recommends Newsletters Cartoons From the Magazine The Week Junior More Politics World News Business Health Science Food & Drink Travel Culture History Personal Finance Puzzles Photos All Categories Newsletter sign up Newsletter Home Health speed read Why scientists are worried about bird flu Researchers are sounding the alarm about cases of avian influenza in mammals Newsletter sign up Newsletter (Image credit: Illustrated | Gettyimages) By David Faris published 7 February 2023 The 2022-2023 avian influenza outbreak is officially the worst on record. Since last winter, some 208 million birds worldwide have died from H5N1 or been culled, raising the price of eggs and chicken globally. In recent days, scientists have sounded increasingly worried that a mutation could cause a "spillover" event, in which H5N1 becomes more efficiently transmitted from human-to-human. Why are scientists worried?Revelations about the spread of avian flu at a Spanish mink farm in October are raising alarm. The mink were infected with an H5N1 variant known as 2.3.4.4b, which was discovered in 2020 and has since made its way around the world. While it is not uncommon for mammals to catch avian flu after direct contact with infected birds, the mink farm showed evidence of transmission between the mink themselves, "unprecedented among mammals," Columbia University professor Zeynep Tufekci wrote at The New York Times.How pandemics change society Is the COVID 'emergency' over? What we know about long COVIDSamples obtained from the mink had a mutation that made it easier for the virus to gain a foothold in mammals, and it appears to be the first instance of such transmission outside of laboratory settings. If the virus can do it in minks, it can do it in us. Imperial College London virologist Tom Peacock told Science this "is a clear mechanism for an H5 pandemic to start." Dutch virologist Marion Koopmans said on Twitter that "we are playing with fire." The more types of animals that are infected with H5N1, the more opportunities the virus has to jump into humans through an intermediary host. The mink farm incident is one of 119 outbreaks among animals since October 2021, according to the BBC. There have been five confirmed human cases in that time period, as well as one death. Subscribe to The Week Escape your echo chamber. Get the facts behind the news, plus analysis from multiple perspectives. SUBSCRIBE & SAVE Sign up for The Week's Free Newsletters From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox. From our morning news briefing to a weekly Good News Newsletter, get the best of The Week delivered directly to your inbox. Sign up How deadly is H5N1 for humans? The World Health Organization's data shows that in the past 20 years, there have been 868 documented human infections of H5N1, who caught the virus from direct contact with the saliva, mucus, and feces of infected birds. Of those cases, 457 led to deaths, giving H5N1 a known Case Fatality Rate (CFR) of over 53 percent. While the Infection Fatality Rate (IFR), an estimate that takes into account asymptomatic or mild cases that go unreported, may not be that high, there is no question that if the virus were able to spread easily between humans, it would cause a grave public health crisis. In 2008, a group of Canadian researchers estimated that the human CFR of a mutated avian flu pandemic would be between 14 percent and 33 percent, which would make the COVID-19 crisis look minor in comparison. Other researchers are more optimistic, and believe that the fatality rate of the existing strain that infects humans through direct contact with birds is much lower than WHO estimates due to missed cases.Why has this outbreak been so bad?The 2022-2023 disaster is ongoing and approaching the one-year mark, and scientists do not have a clear answer as to why this outbreak is so much worse than those in the past.Avian influenza kills nearly all the birds it infects and can burn through entire flocks in a matter of days. At least 80 species of birds have been infected during this outbreak, which has affected countries around the world. Health authorities have taken different approaches to controlling the outbreak. China is vaccinating commercial birds, while French and British authorities have encouraged farmers to bring their flocks indoors to avoid infection from wild birds passing by. U.S. farmers are encouraged to pursue a variety of biosecurity measures, including limiting the number of people coming in and out of farm facilities and placing "disinfectant foot baths" at the entrances to coops. Other producers have, in effect, gone into lockdown to limit their own contacts.Other countries, including France and the Netherlands, are experimenting with new vaccines, which had been a last resort. Vaccinated birds and their eggs are difficult to export commercially — paradoxically because vaccination is seen as evidence that avian flu is running rampant through the exporting country and because vaccinated birds may not show symptoms when infected. But the most common approach, and that deployed in the United States, is to cull domesticated flocks, which can be agonizing for farmers and financially ruinous.How worried should we be?Experts have been warning for years about the emergence of a pandemic-capable avian flu in humans. So far, no mutations have been found in humans infected with the virus that would make it easier to transmit between people, and the risk to humans who are not in direct contact with infected birds is negligible. There have been cases in the past where humans were shown to have been infected with versions of H5N1 that carried worrisome mutations but that nevertheless did not lead to a pandemic. "But it seems foolish to count on that," wrote Tufekci. After all, "deadly influenza pandemics occur regularly in human history."Human vaccine development efforts are ongoing. There are existing vaccines that would likely help, but production would need to be scaled up dramatically and adjustments made for the new strain of the flu. Eyal Leshem, director of the Center for Travel Medicine and Tropical Diseases at Sheba Medical Center in Israel, said last year that "I don't think anyone should panic about it because bird flu has been around for a long time in various locations and has not yet turned into a pandemic, highly pathogenic influenza." Explore More Briefing public health Sign up for Today's Best Articles in your inboxA free daily email with the biggest news stories of the day – and the best features from TheWeek.comContact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over. David FarisSocial Links NavigationDavid Faris is an associate professor of political science at Roosevelt University and the author of It's Time to Fight Dirty: How Democrats Can Build a Lasting Majority in American Politics. He is a frequent contributor to Informed Comment, and his work has appeared in the Chicago Sun-Times, The Christian Science Monitor, and Indy Week. Latest Puppet shows, pagodas and pho: a guide to Hanoi The Week Recommends Vietnam's capital city blends the ancient with the new By Catherine Garcia, The Week US Published 11 November 24 'There are benefits, but not acknowledging them would tell only half of the story' Instant Opinion Opinion, comment and editorials of the day By Justin Klawans, The Week US Published 11 November 24 What Trump's win could mean for Big Tech Talking Points The tech industry is bracing itself for Trump's second administration By Theara Coleman, The Week US Published 11 November 24 You might also like A growing iodine deficiency could bring back America's goiter Under the Radar Ailment is back thanks to complacency, changing diets and a lack of public-health education By Harriet Marsden, The Week UK Published 10 November 24 Flame retardants found in black plastics could have health consequences Under the Radar Time to replace your kitchen tools By Devika Rao, The Week US Published 17 October 24 Preeclampsia: The dangerous pregnancy condition is affecting more women Under the Radar The condition of preeclampsia is on the rise and can be deadly if left untreated By Devika Rao, The Week US Published 19 September 24 The EEE virus is spreading in the US The Explainer The mosquito strikes again By Devika Rao, The Week US Published 9 September 24 Baby food is not as healthy as it should be Under the Radar Labels are leaving things out. And brands are highlighting only what they want to. By Devika Rao, The Week US Published 30 August 24 Why gonorrhoea is becoming 'untreatable' In the Spotlight Infections hit record high as experts warn about rise in antibiotic-resistant cases By Elizabeth Carr-Ellis, The Week UK Published 15 August 24 Mushroom edibles are tripping up users the explainer The psychedelics can sometimes have questionable components By Devika Rao, The Week US Published 24 July 24 Brexit, Matt Hancock and black swans: five takeaways from Covid inquiry report The Explainer UK was 'unprepared' for pandemic and government 'failed' citizens with flawed response, says damning report By Harriet Marsden, The Week UK Published 19 July 24 View More ▸ TheWeek About Us Contact Future's experts Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Advertise With Us The Week is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. © Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036.Avian influenza infects Mississippi broiler flock | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseBroilers & TurkeysBroilersAvian influenza infects Mississippi broiler flockA commercial broiler flock in Leake County, Mississippi, has been struck by highly pathogenic avian influenza.Roy GraberFebruary 8, 2023(Yurii Bukhanovskyi | Bigstock)A commercial broiler flock in Leake County, Mississippi, has been struck by highly pathogenic avian influenza.There were 90,000 chickens in the flock, according to information on the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) website.With this case, Mississippi has now had two confirmed cases of HPAI in commercial poultry during the 2022-23 outbreak, although this is the first case to be confirmed in 2023. The other case involved a commercial broiler breeder flock in Lawrence County, affecting 34,400 birds. There were 34,400 birds in that flock.According to APHIS, Mississippi has also had 188 confirmed cases of HPAI in wild birds, with the majority of those involving black vultures.So far in 2023, the following states have had HPAI confirmed in commercial flocks: Pennsylvania, Virginia, Iowa, Tennessee, California and Kansas. However, this is only the second case of HPAI to strike a commercial broiler operation in 2023. The first one involved a flock of 267,800 chickens in Weakley County, Tennessee, with that case being confirmed on January 20.To learn more about HPAI cases in commercial poultry flocks in the United States and Canada, see an interactive map on WATTPoultry.com. Read our ongoing coverage of the global avian influenza outbreak.RecommendedLatest NewsNational Turkey Federation offering 'Thanksgiving 101' tips and recipesLatest NewsHormel Foods honoredRelated StoriesBroilersLasers could encourage broiler movement, welfareBroilersFire damages Wayne-Sanderson Farms facility in North CarolinaBroilersAdvances in poultry weighing simplify supply chain planningBroilersNew European poultry sustainability charter introducedMore in BroilersConsumer TrendsPerdue Farms wins ‘pasture-raised’ chicken label petitionNew USDA FSIS guidelines clarify poultry housing definitions for consumers.Brand InsightsThink strategically in developing IBDV vaccination programsZoetisDeveloping vaccination programs for IBDV requires strategic use of several vaccine types.Avian InfluenzaAPHIS updates report on California HPAI casesFlock size numbers for two of four affected operations have been disclosed.Global Poultry Trends by RegionVilsack addresses Pure Prairie Poultry criticismThe U.S. Secretary of Agriculture says the company’s bankruptcy, while unfortunate, is a rarity for processors to receive USDA funding.Latest NewsStrong third quarter for Pilgrim’s PrideThe company’s net sales and net income rose significantly during the third quarter.BroilersPilgrim’s: Hurricane damage was the worst for growersSome of the contract growers had barns destroyed by Helene and Milton, and it could take as long as a year to get them back in operation, CEO said.Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza strikes two California broiler flocksThe number of chickens involved has not yet been disclosed.BroilersLawmakers want answers from USDA about Pure Prairie PoultryRepublican U.S. representatives and senators want to know why the agency approved millions of taxpayer dollars for a company that shuttered its plant and left millions of chickens without care.BroilersIrwin to succeed Plylar as president of Mountaire FarmsPhillip Plylar, who has been with the company for 28 years, will retire at the end of 2024.BroilersIowa Pure Prairie Poultry chickens depopulatedThreats of legal action left the state of Iowa no options to process the birds of the nearly-defunct poultry company.Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza confirmed in California broiler chickensA flock of nearly 800,000 in Tulare County is the first instance of avian flu in U.S. broilers since February.BroilersRivers to retire as Wayne-Sanderson Farms CEOHe will be succeeded by Chief Operating Officer Kevin McDaniel, effective April 1, 2025.BroilersSen. Baldwin to USDA: Help past Pure Prairie Poultry growersSenator from Wisconsin tells Vilsack the situation is urgent “due to the hundreds of thousands of animals’ lives at risk and the financial hit for the farmers that contracted with this processor.”Page 1 of 32Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.A new outbreak of bird flu is spreading to mammals | Grist Skip to content Grist home Support nonprofit news today $10/mo $15/mo Other Donate Donate Climate. Justice. Solutions. Grist home Follow Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Instagram Follow us on YouTube Get your weekly dose of good climate news to your inbox Email Submit Δ Donate Donate Menu A nonprofit, independent media organization dedicated to telling stories of climate solutions and a just future. Search Go To About Support Us Newsletters Advertise Become a Member Events The Grist 50 Imagine 2200 Cli-Fi Pitch Us Topics Politics Energy Equity Solutions All Topics Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Instagram Follow us on YouTube Get your weekly dose of good climate news to your inbox Email Submit Δ As climate change disrupts ecosystems, a new outbreak of bird flu spreads to mammals “Am I concerned? Hell yes, I’m concerned.” Winfried Wisniewski/Getty Images Zoya Teirstein Staff Writer Published Feb 10, 2023 Topic Climate + Health Share/Republish Copy Link Republish Copy Link Email SMS Twitter Facebook Republish Reddit LinkedIn Public health experts around the world are sounding the alarm as cases of a virulent strain of avian influenza called H5N1 rise in mammals. Bird flu has infected humans in the past, mostly people who work directly with diseased poultry, but there has never been widespread human-to-human transmission of the virus. If there were, it could be a catastrophe: The original H5N1 mutation had a 50 to 60 percent mortality rate in humans. The latest outbreak of H5N1, which began in the U.S. in late 2021, has resulted in the culling of 58 million birds thus far and led to a marked increase in the cost of eggs and poultry at the supermarket. It’s America’s second major surge of H5N1 since the strain was first detected in southern China in the late 1990s — the first significant U.S. wave kicked off in 2014 and was contained mainly to the Midwest. Since 2021, H5N1 has been found in at least 47 states. It’s circulating among wild birds, cropping up in wild mammals, and, crucially, bouncing between mink. That last development is what really has experts alarmed. More broadly, the H5N1 outbreak fits a pattern scientists have been ringing alarm bells about for years now: Climate change is throwing ecosystems out of whack and spurring the spread of disease, putting wildlife and human health at risk. Avian flu viruses are adapted to bind to birds’ receptor cells. Humans and other mammals have some avian-like receptors, but they’re typically buried deep in the lungs. Because of this anatomical quirk, it would take an enormous load of H5N1 for one infected mammal to dredge up enough of the virus to infect another mammal. Unless, of course, the virus evolved to bind to mammalian cells in the upper respiratory tract. Grist thanks its sponsors. Become one. To support our nonprofit environmental journalism, please consider disabling your ad-blocker to allow ads on Grist. Here's How That’s what appears to be happening now. Late last year, 50,000 mink on a mink farm in Spain were killed when lab tests showed the animals had contracted H5N1. A study published last month said that the virus had been spreading between the mammals, whose respiratory tracts have physiological similarities to humans’. It’s the first time such an outbreak has been documented. “It’s something we’ve never seen,” Jean-Pierre Vaillancourt, a professor in the department of clinical sciences at the University of Montreal in Canada, said. “Am I concerned? Hell yes, I’m concerned.” Recent isolated cases of H5N1 in various wild animal species are adding to experts’ unease. The virus has cropped up in seals, sea lions, dolphins, grizzly bears, foxes, and ferrets, many of which probably got the virus from eating infected birds. Globally, there have been six human H5N1 infections, including one death, in this surge of the virus, none of which was caused by one human giving it to another. But experts are keeping a close eye on H5N1 in case the virus continues to adapt to the point where it can easily infect humans and prompt person-to-person transmission. “We don’t want an avian H5N1 being adapted to mammals,” Juergen A. Richt, director of the Center of Excellence for Emerging and Zoonotic Animal Diseases, told Grist. “Obviously, the next level would be humans.” Grist thanks its sponsors. Become one. To support our nonprofit environmental journalism, please consider disabling your ad-blocker to allow ads on Grist. Here's How The past few years have seen an uptick in the size and pace of bird flu outbreaks. The virus has moved outside the bounds of its typical seasons, which coincide with birds’ spring and fall migrations. In the past year, H5N1 has been detected in the summer months in Italy, when high temperatures should have extinguished it, and in the depths of winter in Canada, when migrating birds are few and far between. The factors influencing these outbreaks are still largely unknown. The virus may be hanging out in the environment for longer or spreading with greater frequency and ease between birds. Vaillancourt suspects one overarching explanation. “How come this virus is popping up in the middle of summer in the Mediterranean Sea or when it’s minus 20 or 30 in a commercial farm in Canada?” he asked. “There’s close to 80 countries in the world with this problem, we’ve never seen that before. That’s why we’re seriously looking at climate change.” Studies have found that changing weather patterns fundamentally affect the way birds behave in ways that could influence the spread of bird flu. Rising temperatures and the seasonal changes they induce force birds to adjust their migratory patterns and converge in new combinations. Rising sea levels also affect where birds make their nests and lay their eggs, prompting species that don’t typically interact to make contact and share disease. “In the last two to three years, we have seen a drastic change in the pattern of circulation of H5N1 virus in wild bird population, with massive outbreaks and a wider set of species involved,” Marius Gilbert, a spatial epidemiologist at the National Fund for Scientific Research in Brussels, told Grist via email. He said scientists have been able to make links between climate change and bird migration, but figuring out the ways in which climate change may be influencing the spread of avian flu is a far more complicated and difficult task. Generally, research shows that climate change threatens to fundamentally restructure existing networks of animals, which creates conditions for diseases to find and infect new hosts, a process called “viral spillover.” More opportunities for disease sharing among a wide range of species, not just birds, may lead to more illnesses making the jump from animals into human beings, the way COVID did in 2019. Implementing wildlife disease surveillance networks — systems local governments can use to find and identify rogue pathogens in the wild before they infect humans — can help keep these illnesses at bay. When an illness such as H5N1 is detected on a farm, nearby public health departments should be able to quickly distribute tests to farmworkers and anyone else who comes in contact with a sick animal, so that people with infections can isolate. Wealthy countries like the U.S. should also be investing heavily in an mRNA vaccine for influenza, which could be rapidly tweaked to match H5N1 if it started to spread among humans and shared with the rest of the globe. (The U.S. has a small stockpile of non-mRNA H5N1 vaccines, but ramping up production would take months.) “We have many of the tools that are needed, including vaccines,” Zeynep Tufekci, a sociologist and an opinion writer for the New York Times, wrote in a recent column about H5N1. “What’s missing is a sense of urgency and immediate action.” A message from All donations matched for a limited time! Grist is the only award-winning newsroom focused on exploring equitable solutions to climate change. It’s vital reporting made entirely possible by loyal readers like you. At Grist, we don’t believe in paywalls. Instead, we rely on our readers to pitch in what they can so that we can continue bringing you our solution-based climate news. Grist is the only award-winning newsroom focused on exploring equitable solutions to climate change. It’s vital reporting made entirely possible by loyal readers like you. At Grist, we don’t believe in paywalls. Instead, we rely on our readers to pitch in what they can so that we can continue bringing you our solution-based climate news. Donate Now Not Now Next Article Cleaning up ‘forever chemicals’ is costly and messy — just ask this Wisconsin town John McCracken Accountability Grist thanks its sponsors. Become one. Grist thanks its sponsors. Become one. To support our nonprofit environmental journalism, please consider disabling your ad-blocker to allow ads on Grist. Here's How Health The nation’s first commercial carbon sequestration plant is in Illinois. It leaks. Juanpablo Ramirez-Franco As Helene’s immediate impacts recede, a public health threat rises Katie Myers & Zoya Teirstein Is climate anxiety a pressing problem, or a luxury? Eve Andrews As climate change helps mosquitoes spread disease, critics push for alternatives to pesticides Diana Kruzman Latest Grist names Katherine Bagley as Editor-in-Chief, restructures editorial team Rachel Glickhouse He’ll try, but Trump can’t stop the clean energy revolution Matt Simon It’s already official: You’re living through the hottest year on record Sachi Kitajima Mulkey ‘Used like taxis’: Soaring private jet flights drive up climate-heating emissions Damian Carrington, The Guardian Modal Gallery / The only newsroom focused on finding solutions at the intersection of climate and justice. Donate today to help keep Grist’s site and newsletters free. Support Grist Topics Energy Politics Solutions Accountability Extreme Weather The Grist 50 Company About Team Contact Careers Fellowships Pressroom DEIJ More Newsletters Events Visionaries Bureau Become a Member Advertising Republish Accessibility © 1999-2024 Grist Magazine, Inc. All rights reserved. Grist is powered by WordPress VIP. Terms of Use | Privacy Policy Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Instagram Follow us on YouTube Grist.org uses cookies for enhanced user experience, and for analyzing the site's performance and traffic. Grist may share information about your use of our website with social media partners and analytics partners. Privacy Policy X Share This Video:Could bird flu in mink signal threat of a human pandemic? – DW – 02/07/2023 You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Skip to contentSkip to main menuSkip to more DW sitesLatest videosLatest audioRegionsAfricaAsiaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastNorth AmericaGermanyTopicsClimateEqualityHealthHuman RightsMigrationTechnologyCategoriesBusinessScienceEnvironmentCultureSportsLive TVLatest audioLatest videosIn focusGerman coalition collapseDonald TrumpCOP29AdvertisementNature and EnvironmentEuropeCould bird flu in mink signal threat of a human pandemic?Jeannette Cwienk02/07/2023February 7, 2023A bird flu outbreak on a Spanish mink farm has alarmed scientists. The virus may be spreading for the first time from mammal to mammal — and could become a danger for humans.https://p.dw.com/p/4N4iRBird flu is devastating UK's famous seabird colonies, leaving scientists to search for cluesImage: Owen Humphreys/empics/picture allianceAdvertisementIt started in October 2022, when several dead mink were discovered on a farm in Galicia in northwestern Spain. Veterinarians initially blamed the coronavirus. But tests revealed that the highly pathogenic avian flu virus H5N1 was the culprit. To stop the spread of the dangerous pathogen, more than 50,000 mink on the farm were killed. While farm workers themselves were not infected, the case remains a cause of concern for scientists. Mink farm outbreak 'incredibly concerning' The spread of the virus from birds to other species is nothing new. The pathogen that causes bird flu, or avian influenza, has been found in raccoons, foxes and seals, though these remain isolated cases. While there have been some cases of H5N1 infecting humans, the World Health Organization has said there's no evidence of human-to-human transmission so far. When the disease has spread to humans and other mammals, it has been via direct contact with excrement from infected birds or their carcasses, according to Timm Harder, an avian influenza expert at the Friedrich Loeffler Institute's diagnostic virology department in Germany. But the mink outbreak appears to be a rare case where mammals are transmitting the disease to each other rather than through direct contact with an infected bird. This is something "new," said Harder. Scientists fear potential bird flu transmission among mink could spread to other mammals Image: Ruslan Shamukov/dpa/picture alliance Part of the problem is that mink are intensively farmed. They're kept in high numbers in confined spaces, which means infection spreads rapidly in the highly susceptible mammals, said Harder. Harder added that researchers have identified several pathogen mutations in the mink, one of which allows "the virus to better reproduce in mammals." Scientists are worried that the virus, which has led to the deaths of tens of millions of birds globally, could spread to more mink farms and become "more transmissible." "This is incredibly concerning," said Tom Peacock, a virologist at Imperial College London, in an interview with the scientific journal, Science. "This is a clear mechanism for a H5 pandemic to start." Could avian influenza trigger a human pandemic? Of the 868 known cases of H5N1 infection in humans worldwide between January 2003 and November 2022, 457 were fatal, according to the WHO. Factory chicken farms have been the sites of severe bird flu outbreaksImage: Ho/Jiji Press/Niigata prefectural government/picture alliance/dpa However, because there has been no sustained human-to-human transmission, the risk of human infection from avian flu is low, said the WHO. Some highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses have an increased potential to cause new zoonotic diseases — which are transmissible from animals to humans and vice versa. While Timm Harder said there are "numerous hurdles for a more extensive adaptation to humans," he added the mutations seen in the virus that infected mink must be further studied and evaluated. How a harmless virus became dangerous Waterfowl have long played host to influenza viruses, but these early strains were low in pathogenicity, said Wolfgang Fiedler, an ornithologist at the Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior. The viruses weren't too contagious or damaging. But when these viruses that were harmless to wild birds spread to factory poultry farms — where thousands of animals were crammed tight — the disease spread rapidly and the virus could mutate, Fiedler explained. What are zoonotic diseases? To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video The result was the highly contagious virus strains H5N1 and H5N8, which likely originated on poultry farms in East Asia, according to the Scientific Task Force on Avian Influenza and Wild Birds established by the UN. Farmed ducks likely become infected from wild birds. Ducks are "kept together with pigs, for example," which aided the mutation process, noted Fiedler. Such animal husbandry methods "make a virus like this insanely happy." In fact, outbreaks of these highly pathogenic strains are typically associated with "intensive domestic poultry production and associated trade and marketing systems ... via contaminated poultry, poultry products and inanimate objects," according to the UN's bird flu task force. The highly contagious H5N1 and H5N8 virus strains were in turn transmitted to wild birds via infected farmed birds, explained virologist Timm Harder. The viruses could then be transmitted over great distances during bird migrations. How much damage has the bird flu outbreak caused? The ongoing avian flu outbreak is considered the largest observed in Europe to date, according to the European Food Safety Authority, an EU agency. Between October 2021 and September 2022, 50 million farm birds had to be culled in 37 countries. More than 3,800 highly pathogenic bird flu cases were counted in wild birds. Experts believe the number of unreported cases is probably much higher. Wild birds could be carrying the H5N1 avian influenza virus further afieldImage: Adrian Bradshaw/dpa/picture-alliance Until recently, bird flu mainly occurred in fall and winter. "Now the virus is also circulating in wild birds during the summer months," confirmed Harder, noting that the animals breed closely in large colonies in the warmer months, providing ideal conditions for the spread of the virus. The avian influenza wave also reached South America for the first time in the fall. Peru, Venezuela, Ecuador and Colombia were among the countries affected. In Honduras, more than 240 dead pelicans were found in one week alone. Harder said he is concerned that the virus could spread from South America to Antarctica and endanger penguin populations. Apart from Antarctica, only Australia has escaped the virus. Despite the acute outbreak among birds, Harder sees one ray of hope in that the broad spread of the virus could promote immunity in wild birds. Antibodies have already been found in live animals. This article was adapted from German by Stuart Braun. Jeannette Cwienk Writer and editor with a focus on climate and environmental issuesSend us your feedbackYour feedbackAdvertisementSkip next section Explore moreExplore moreCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCurrent US Bird Flu Situation in Humanswww.cdc.govEurosurveillanceHighly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection in farmed minks, Spain, October 2022www.eurosurveillance.orgAbout DWWho we arePressDW Global Media ForumDW offersLearn GermanDW AkademieServiceNewslettersReceptionFAQContactTopics from A to ZHeadlinesB2BSales & DistributionTravelAdvertisingGerman News ServiceFollow us on© 2024 Deutsche WellePrivacy PolicyLegal noticeDigital accessibilityData privacy settingsAvian Flu Has Jumped To Mammals. What Experts Say About Its Pandemic Potential.Reporting To YouSign InSign InAbout UsGot A Tip?buzzfeed.comHealthBird Flu Has Taken Out Millions Of Chickens And Turkeys. What That Means For Humans.The risk to humans is still low, but cases in mammals are growing globally, which is a troubling step on the road toward human infection.By by Amanda GardnerBuzzFeed News ContributorPosted on February 11, 2023, 4:46 pmTwitterFacebookLink BuzzFeed News; Getty Images More than 58 million domestic fowl in the US have died or been culled over the past 12 months due to a large outbreak of the avian flu — the deadliest outbreak in the country’s history, according to the Department of Agriculture.The specter of an avian flu pandemic is always on health authorities’ minds. Should we be worried this time? According to the CDC, the risk to humans right now is low. “They’re not considering this anything that needs to be on people’s minds continuously,” said Geoffrey Lossie, an avian diagnostician at Purdue University's College of Veterinary Medicine.However, this avian virus — the H5N1 strain of influenza — has a mortality rate in humans of 50%, which is one reason scientists are keeping a close watch on it. So many chickens have been killed it’s contributing to an egg shortage in the US that’s driving up prices. Egg prices more than doubled in 2022 but have since declined, and other factors, like inflation and demand, have played a role in the cost of eggs.The H5N1 virus has been detected in more than 120 wild mammals in the US in 2022 and 2023, including red foxes, skunks, and even grizzly bears — a troubling step in the road toward human infection.An outbreak at a mink farm in Spain suggested the virus can now spread in mammals, and 52,000 infected animals had to be culled. This week, four dead seals tested positive for bird flu in Scotland, as did 585 sea lions in Peru, suggesting cases are growing globally in mammals.Past avian flus have moved from birds to other animals, but the number of mammals that have been infected recently is unusual, said Gregory C. Gray, an infectious disease epidemiologist at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston. “There’s concern that it could further change and jump to humans,” he said.The H5N1 strain of influenza is a mix of DNA from a Eurasian lineage of the virus and a North American lineage, Lossie said. The strain has had a 53% death rate among humans, based on 858 reported cases globally since 2003, according to the World Health Organization. The “H” and “N” refer to proteins on the surface of the influenza virus that affect how the virus behaves. What is bird flu?Different influenza viruses tend to target different species, said Dr. William Schaffner, a spokesperson for the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Avian flu is carried by wild migratory birds like wild ducks and geese and usually follows certain patterns. The virus typically doesn’t sicken or kill wild birds, though it does kill domestic fowl. In this case, though, influenza is making some wild birds sick, Lossie said.Usually the virus passes from wild birds to domestic birds through feces. In the current outbreak, there is some evidence that the avian flu is also passing through respiratory droplets in wild birds. It’s definitely being shed through the respiratory route in domestic birds like chickens and turkeys, Lossie said.And while the number of birds who have perished from the avian flu is about the same as in a 2015 avian flu outbreak, the outbreak has now visited double the number of states. “This does suggest that bird flu is more widely distributed geographically,” Schaffner said.Also, Lossie added that scientists have detected far more infections in wild birds during this outbreak than in past outbreaks.How does bird flu get to humans?It’s rare for the exact same virus that infects birds to reach humans. “The appropriate receptors in the mucous membranes in our throats, noses, and upper part of our respiratory tract are not very receptive to bird flu,” Schaffner said.When it does happen, it’s usually in someone who lives and works closely with birds — and the infection stops there. Since the outbreak began, there have only been four cases in humans and one death. “Quite a number of different strains of avian flu have spilled over to humans, but they’ve had limited, if any, human-to-human transmission,” Gray said. “Often it’s a dead end.” Only one person in the US, a poultry worker in Colorado, was infected by the current strain in April while culling poultry infected with H5N1. He reported only fatigue and was treated with antivirals. He has since recovered, Lossie said. (There was also a second human case in South West England detected at the end of 2021.)Usually there’s another step involved: The virus has to mutate enough to infect a mammal and mutate again to infect people. Every time a virus replicates, DNA can mutate, giving it opportunities to infect different life forms. New strains of a virus also happen through genetic drift, which is when two virus strains — say one human and one avian — combine to create a new variant, Lossie said.“Most pandemics generate when there is a species jump and usually with an intermediate host where the virus can evolve,” said Dr. Cesar Arias, chief of infectious diseases at Houston Methodist Hospital. “The concern here is the Spanish report of mink transmission. There could be a genetic adaptation in which the virus can become airborne from human to human.”So far, the CDC said that the circulating virus lacks the genetic changes that would allow it to easily cause illness in humans.How deadly is bird flu in humans?It can be very deadly, with a mortality rate as high as 50% in the cases where bird flu has jumped directly from birds to farmers and other handlers, Schaffner said.Every time the virus replicates, it can mutate into a version the human immune system has never seen before. “That makes it harder for our immune systems to fight the infection,” Arias said. “When they get to humans, the adaptations tend to be accompanied by high virulence, which means infections are severe with high mortality.”Basically, our bodies have never encountered these new viruses and have no defenses. This is effectively what happened with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID.How worried should we be?Right now, the avian flu doesn’t warrant five-alarm concern, experts said.But things could change. While it takes time for a pandemic to develop, “I think we’re headed in that direction,” Arias said.Right now, the biggest risk is to humans who have a lot of contact with birds, especially poultry, Lossie said. That includes not only people in commercial poultry operations but also people with backyard flocks, which are on the rise due to the rising price of eggs in stores.Are there ways to protect ourselves?The current outbreak remains a matter mainly for public health organizations for the foreseeable future. The USDA has a surveillance system in place to track avian flu in birds — one they say is the strongest in the world. “We need to be sure the US government is very vigilant through surveillance and be alert for novel viruses that might spill into humans,” Gray said.There aren’t any avian flu vaccines widely available, but there are prototypes. “The vaccines have basically been constructed then the question would be how quickly to manufacture them,” Schaffner said.The CDC cautions against unprotected contact with wild or domestic birds. They recommend wearing an N95 respiratory or surgical mask, eye protection, disposable gloves, and boots as well as washing your hands after any contact and don’t touch your mouth, nose, or eyes, all possible points of entry for the virus.If you have chickens or other birds (including pet birds), keep them protected from wild birds. “Try to shelter your backyard herd or flocks of chickens from migratory birds,” Schaffner said.Avian flu in wild and domestic birds isn’t in and of itself a cause for panic, Schaffner added. “There’s no immediate threat but public health authorities are on the alert.” ● More on this TikTok’s Favorite Emu Is Sick With Bird Flu And Experts Were Alarmed At How The Owner Handled The Outbreak Katie Camero · Oct. 18, 2022 Emmanuel The Emu Never Had Bird Flu Katie Camero · Oct. 24, 2022 A Florida Man Was Attacked And Killed By A Bird Often Referred To As A "Living Dinosaur" Michael Blackmon · April 14, 2019 Amanda GardnerBuzzFeed News ContributorSkip to footerSectionsArts & EntertainmentBooksCelebrityCulture & CriticismHealthInternet CultureInvestigationsJPGLGBTQOpinionPoliticsTechCompanySupport UsBuzzFeed.comPrivacy PolicyUser AgreementFollow UsFacebook FacebookTwitter TwitterInstagram InstagramBuzzFeed News Homea BuzzFeed brand.As bird flu hits mammals, scientists on alert for mutationsIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsScience NewsAs bird flu spreads to minks, sea lions and other mammals, scientists are on alert for dangerous mutationsAdapted to birds, H5N1 has been found in various mammals, but it would need a complicated string of mutations to spread more easily in people. Roosters drink out of a pot in the backyard on a farm in Austin, Texas, on Jan. 23.Brandon Bell / Getty Images fileFeb. 11, 2023, 1:00 PM UTCBy Evan BushHundreds of wild sea lions in South America, a farm of minks in Europe, and more than 58 million poultry birds have died.All of these animals fell victim to the impact of avian influenza — a virus rapidly circulating the globe, killing wild and domesticated animals, disrupting ecologies and hampering the food supply. Human health is inextricably linked to animal health, and these events are spooky reminders that a widespread outbreak in animals has potential consequences for humans. In the U.S., the most recent wave of bird flu has struck in 17 mammals and more than 160 birds. It’s the broadest outbreak of H5N1 since it surfaced as a concern in China in 1996. The virus has been under close watch by scientists, even more so now that it has spread far and wide.“This is the number one potential pandemic virus everyone has been interested in for a long time,” said Richard Webby, an infectious disease researcher at St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis, Tennessee, and the director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Studies on the Ecology of Influenza in Animals and Birds. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the World Health Organization’s director-general, said on Wednesday that avian influenza’s spillover to mammal species must be monitored closely, and that risk to humans remained low for the moment.“But we cannot assume that will remain the case, and we must prepare for any change in the status quo,” he said. The sheer amount of H5N1 circulating has heightened the risk the virus could spill over into other species, develop the ability to transmit among people and become a pandemic.But the virus has yet to unlock a complicated string of mutations or genetic changes that would allow it to spread more rapidly in people.“It’s a series of events, each of which is fairly improbable. This is why I say the risk to humans is presently low. The evolutionary barriers are high,” said Anice Lowen, a virologist and associate professor at Emory University School of Medicine. “It is a numbers game. So that’s one reason why the scale of the current avian outbreak is concerning.”Researchers are particularly concerned about this version of avian influenza, H5N1, because most humans haven’t dealt with it before. “We don’t have an immune response against H5. That’s why the virus has pandemic potential,” Lowen said.Scientists have also observed high death rates and severe disease in chickens and mammals that have contracted H5N1, which has made them concerned the virus could cause severe sickness in people, too. The U.S. has counted a single human case of H5N1 in the United States — a prison inmate in Colorado culling infected birds on a farm. Previous spillovers to humans, mostly in people in Southeast Asia and North Africa who likely handled infected birds directly, had high death rates, though those numbers could be biased by limited reporting of mild cases. H5N1 has long been a top pandemic concern. The version that’s been circulating in ducks and other wild birds has evolved and adapted for efficient spread.As those animals travel, the virus does too, through droppings, saliva and nasal secretions. Wild birds are shedding virus and infecting animals “over a larger amount and a larger geographic footprint than ever before,” said Bryan Richards, the emerging disease coordinator at the United States Geological Survey National Wildlife Health Center. More than 6,100 wild birds have tested positive for the virus in the U.S.Poultry farm birds likely become infected from contact with wild bird feces or other secretions. Scavengers like bears, raccoons and foxes have also been infected, likely after eating a dead or diseased bird, Richards said. Marine mammals — including dolphins — have tested positive, too. Recently, more than 500 sea lions were found dead with H5N1 in Peru. It’s not clear if the virus was spreading among these species or if animals were infected through food. The virus is poorly adapted for spread in people. “The avian virus is not as good at attaching to human cells as they are in the birds airways. They’re just not adapted to humans,” said Dr. Helen Chu, an infectious disease physician and influenza expert at UW Medicine in Seattle. To spread effectively in humans, the virus would need to make several genetic changes. That process would likely take place in other mammals. Webby and Lowen said there were two main processes the virus could undertake to evolve a better bind with receptors in human respiratory cells.The first would be for the virus to change rapidly through reassortment, an “evolutionary shortcut” in which an animal becomes infected with both an avian influenza virus and a human virus, Lowen said. During the coinfection, the two segmented influenza viruses could exchange bits of genetic code and combine to create a chimeric virus.That virus would then likely need more replication to fix mismatched genes and develop traits that would allow it to flourish in humans. “Reassortments would be very concerning to see, but probably they still wouldn’t be able to transmit in humans,” Lowen said. “Likely what would be needed is more evolution to fix the mismatches.”Previous avian influenza pandemics — which began in 1957 and 1968 — required both reassortment and additional mutations before they were able to spread widely among humans, Webby said. Each of these pandemics killed about 1 million people worldwide and about 100,000 people in the U.S. The second option is for the virus to mutate within a dense group of animals. Researchers grew concerned after an apparent outbreak of H5N1 on a mink farm in Spain. “They’re in small cages very close together. There’s a level of efficiency of transmission,” Chu said of the mink. Studies more than a decade ago showed that ferrets could pick up mutations for airborne transmission of H5N1 after serial infections. In the recent mink farm outbreak, the virus likely spread from mink to mink, Webby said. Although it picked up one mutation of concern, it largely remained adapted for birds. The mink were culled.“Luckily it was stamped out,” Webby said. The virus faces steep genetic hurdles, but the more it spreads in animals, the more chances it has to surmount those barriers. Lowen said governments should invest further in surveillance of potential hosts that could help the virus leap to humans, consider measures like vaccination to limit the spread in poultry and invest in science that will help determine what genetic changes could be worrisome for people.Evan BushEvan Bush is a science reporter for NBC News. AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoMammalian spread of H5N1 and its pandemic potential - The Hindu India World Elections Technology e-Paper Menu Science Data Opinion SEARCH FREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM Open in The Hindu AppFREE TRIALLOGINGIFT a Subscription ACCOUNT PREMIUM Subscribe Science Data Opinion SEARCH India World Elections Technology e-Paper Science Data Opinion SEARCH News Business Entertainment Life & Style Society Technology Videos Sport Cities States Science Show More Chennai Delhi Bengaluru Hyderabad Movies Food Children Data Kochi Books Education Podcast Brandhub To enjoy additional benefitsFREE TRIALGIFT a Subscription Subscribe LOGIN ACCOUNT PREMIUM ShowcaseSubscribe to NewslettersCrossword+CONNECT WITH US Home Sci-Tech Science Mammalian spread of H5N1 and its pandemic potential PremiumMonitoring the evolution of the shapeshifting bird flu virus can add to the preparedness against another potential pandemicUpdated - February 12, 2023 03:33 pm IST Bani Jolly,Vinod Scaria Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINT Journalists and Interdistrict Environmental Prosecutor’s Office employees walk near the bodies of dead seals on shore of the Caspian Sea, Dagestan. Over 700 dead seals were found along Russia’s Caspian Sea coast where the H5N1 variant was earlier detected in wild birds. | Photo Credit: AP Avian influenza, or bird flu, is a highly contagious viral infection that primarily affects birds. Infrequently, the virus can infect mammals from birds, a phenomenon called spillover, and rarely can spread between mammals. There are several different subtypes of avian influenza viruses, ranging from low pathogenic to highly pathogenic types that can cause severe illness and death in birds. H5N1 is a highly pathogenic subtype of avian influenza that causes severe disease and death in birds. This subtype has caused a number of human infections through close contact with infected birds, or contaminated environments and is often fatal. Recent reports of H5N1 transmission between mammals therefore raise concerns about its potential to cause a human pandemic.Cause for concern The H5N1 subtype has the potential to spill over to other mammals such as minks, ferrets, seals and domestic cats when the animals come in contact with infected birds or their feces or consume carcasses of infected birds and further serve as reservoirs. It is also possible that over time, the virus could evolve through mutations or recombinations with other influenza viruses to adapt to new hosts, leading to further outbreaks. The Hindu Explains | How serious is the bird flu outbreak in India, and how can it be contained?Recently, scientists have been investigating a potential mammalian spillover event after a mass mortality event which killed over 700 seals along Russia’s Caspian Sea coast where a H5N1 variant was detected in wild birds a few months ago. More recently in February 2023, Peru reported cases of H5N1 avian influenza in sea lions and a dolphin, and a lion dying from H5N1 in a zoo. The U.K. has also reported deaths of otters and foxes due to infection by H5N1 subtype. In the past, seals and other mammals, such as foxes, minks, ferrets and domestic cats, have been reported to be infected by H5N1 through contact with birds. Wildlife, including foxes, coyotes and raccoons, often scavenge on infected birds or consume infected bird carcasses. However, the only recorded incidents of intra-mammal transmission of the virus have been among mink bred in close quarters in captivity at a farm in Spain, which were reported recently in 2022. If the H5N1 variant of avian flu has evolved to be transmitted between mammals, there is a rare possibility of another evolutionary jump resulting in human transmission and outbreaks. The recent findings of transmission of H5N1 between mammals thus raise concerns on the potential for H5N1 to cause a pandemic in humans if it were to spill over and become transmissible among humans. Also Read | New bird flu strainsPast outbreaks The H5N1 avian influenza virus was first detected in 1996 on a goose farm in China. Subsequently, a major outbreak was reported in 1997 among poultry in Hong Kong, also leading to human infections of H5N1, which left 6 people dead and 18 infected. In 2004, H5N1 was reported in several countries in Asia, and further a global outbreak which continues to date. In 2013 and 2014, many countries in Europe and Asia reported H5N1 in poultry. Over the years the virus has caused outbreaks across the world, predominantly spread by migratory birds. Till date, over 800 cases of human H5N1 infections have also been reported, with a high fatality of 53%. A new strain of H5N1, named 2.3.4.4b, emerged in 2020 and rapidly spread across Asia, Africa and Europe and subsequently to North and South America by 2021 and 2022, respectively. Many mammals were also infected in these outbreaks, including human infections. H5N1 sequenced from the mink farm in Spain also show several mutations, including (T271A) that enhances viral replication in mammalian tissues. The impact of this mutation in helping the virus spread to and among humans, therefore, remains unknown. Influenza H5N1 can rarely infect humans through direct contact with animals, but often causes severe disease and death. In addition, the widespread H5N1 outbreaks have substantial economic impact, resulting from significant losses to the poultry industry and threatening food and vaccine security (due to the use of eggs for vaccine production), apart from raising animal welfare and environmental concerns. What can be done? Preventing H5N1 spillovers and outbreaks requires a combination of measures including vaccination of poultry, safe disposal of dead birds, quarantine and culling of affected animals, wearing personal protective equipment when handling birds, and improved surveillance and monitoring of H5N1 in birds and other animals. Bird flu | Centre confirms outbreak in seven States, results awaited in two moreHuman vaccines against H5N1 avian influenza have been designed to protect against the most severe forms of the disease. However, the highly mutable nature of the H5N1 virus could potentially decrease vaccine efficacy over time. Therefore, molecular surveillance of avian influenza and its subtypes is essential in understanding and responding to outbreaks. Genome sequencing can be employed to monitor mutations in the virus, the emergence of new subtypes, and keep a close watch on mutations and virulence factors that may increase the ability to infect humans. This can inform public health decisions and guide the deployment of more effective control measures. In summary, although the risk of H5N1 to infect and spread among humans has been evaluated as low, disease and genomic surveillance as an integrated approach to controlling avian influenza are needed to keep a close watch on the outbreak. As we learned from the COVID-19 outbreak, monitoring the evolution of the shapeshifting virus can add to the preparedness against another potential pandemic. (Bani Jolly and Vinod Scaria are researchers at the CSIR Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR-IGIB)). Published - February 11, 2023 06:58 pm IST Read Comments Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER Remove SEE ALL PRINTTop News Today0 / 0 Read in App The Hindu About Us Code of Editorial Values News Archive Sitemap Print Subscription Digital Subscription Subscribe to Newsletters Rss Feeds Readers Editor-Terms of Reference Authors & Contributors Frame Front page Contact us Contact Us Social Media Advertise With Us Group News Sites Business Line BL on Campus Sportstar Frontline இந்து தமிழ் திசை The Hindu Centre Young World Club The Hindu ePaper Business Line ePaper Crossword + Free Games Other Products RoofandFloor STEP Images Classifieds - Print Bookstore & Special Publications Popular Sections Elections Israeli–Palestinian conflict 2023 Latest News National News International News Videos Life & Style Food Podcast Showcase Opinion Editorial Columns Comment Cartoon Letters Interview Lead Business Agri-Business Industry Economy Markets Budget Sport Cricket Football Hockey Tennis Athletics Motorsport Races Other Sports Sci-Tech Science Technology Health Agriculture Environment Gadgets Internet States Andhra Pradesh Karnataka Kerala Tamil Nadu Telangana Cities Bengaluru Chennai Coimbatore Delhi Hyderabad Kochi Kolkata Kozhikode Madurai Mangaluru Mumbai Puducherry Thiruvananthapuram Tiruchirapalli Vijayawada Visakhapatnam Trending on The Hindu News Hamas Chief Yahya Sinwar killing LIVE Full list of Haryana ministers Kolkatan who returns to Durga Puja after 20 years EC to announce schedule for Maharashtra, Jharkhand polls Waqf row Did not want to blow up India ties: Justin Trudeau RSS, Togadia decide to work together to ‘unite’ Hindus Five Eyes support Canada India Canada row Trending on Group sites Stock Market Live Updates Stocks to buy today Hockey Mogun Bagan Paralympics 2024 Gold Rate Today Silver Rate Today Sexual Harassment in Telugu Film Industry Mango: The Michael Jackson of Fruits Frontline Current Issue Terms of Use Privacy Policy Copyright© 2024, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. BACK TO TOPSign in to unlock member-only benefits!Access 10 free stories every monthSave stories to read laterAccess to comment on every storySign-up/manage your newsletter subscriptions with a single clickGet notified by email for early access to discounts & offers on our products✕Looks like you are already logged in from more than 3 devices!To continue logging in, remove at least one device from the below listLog outLog Out from all devicesTerms & conditions | Institutional SubscriberCommentsComments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide by our community guidelines for posting your comments. We have migrated to a new commenting platform. If you are already a registered user of The Hindu and logged in, you may continue to engage with our articles. If you do not have an account please register and login to post comments. Users can access their older comments by logging into their accounts on Vuukle.Flu In Dogs: The Signs And Symptoms To Look For | HuffPost Life Skip to Main Content×Main MenuU.S. Edition2024 ElectionsNewsU.S. NewsWorld NewsBusinessEnvironmentHealthSocial JusticeCrimePoliticsJoe BidenCongressExtremismOpinionEntertainmentCulture & ArtsMediaCelebrityTV & FilmBooksLifeStyle & BeautyFood & DrinkParentingTravelWellnessRelationshipsMoneyHome & LivingWork/LifeShoppingVoicesBlack VoicesQueer VoicesLatino VoicesIndigenous VoicesAsian VoicesWomen's VoicesHuffPost PersonalNEW: GamesHoroscopesVideoFrom Our PartnersWell TraveledThe Good LifeA New ViewNewslettersInternationalU.S.U.K.EspañaFranceΕλλάδα (Greece)Italia日本 (Japan)한국 (Korea)Follow UsTerms | Privacy PolicyPart of HuffPost Wellness. ©2024 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved.×What's Hot Log InSupport Us2024 ELECTIONSNEWSPOLITICSENTERTAINMENTLIFEPERSONALVOICESSHOPPINGGAMESU.S. EditionOpen editions submenuWellnessDogs PetsFluIf You're A Dog Owner, Be Aware Of These Signs Of Flu In Your PetCanine influenza cases are on the rise. Here are the most common symptoms and what to do if you suspect your pup is sick.By Julia RiesOn Assignment For HuffPostFeb 8, 2023, 05:45 AM ESTLEAVE A COMMENTJustin Paget via Getty ImagesMore and more dogs are getting canine influenza, which comes with a host of respiratory symptoms.Veterinarians across the country have recently reported cases of canine influenza, a highly contagious respiratory infection that spreads among our four-legged friends. The outbreaks, which picked up steam in southern states like Alabama, Georgia and Oklahoma at the end of 2022, are now spreading rapidly in the Northeast and beyond.Most dogs that contract the infection will wind up with mild flu-like symptoms, like a cough, eye or nasal discharge, and fatigue, and they will recover in a couple of weeks. However, a small percentage may develop severe complications, including a high fever or pneumonia.Advertisement Dr. Rebecca Greenstein, a veterinarian based in Canada’s Ontario province and a veterinary medical adviser for pet care platform Rover, said she’s been seeing more and more dogs come into her practice with signs of respiratory infections. “We’re definitely seeing more cases, in clusters, of respiratory symptoms in otherwise healthy young dogs,” she said.Though a canine influenza shot is available, most vets don’t routinely vaccinate against the dog flu since it hasn’t been much of an issue historically. But amid the recent rise in cases, many vets are encouraging pet parents to get their dogs vaccinated— especially if they board their dogs or take them to the dog park. “It’s now turning into enough of an issue that we’re reevaluating our vaccine protocols to heighten protection for our canine patients,” Greenstein said. Advertisement What Exactly Is Canine Influenza?Canine influenza is a super-contagious respiratory infection that primarily spreads through large respiratory droplets, which dogs expel when they cough, bark and sneeze. (Sound familiar?) The virus can also spread through contaminated surfaces, like water bowls and places where dogs congregate (think groomers or doggy day care), Greenstein said. Dogs can also spread it by rubbing noses with one another.Because canine influenza is considered an emerging disease and there’s little immunity in the doggy population, most pooches that are exposed will get infected. Up to a quarter of infected dogs will remain asymptomatic, and the rest — around 80% — will develop a mix of flu-like symptoms, including a cough, sneeze, nasal discharge, runny eyes, fever and malaise. Advertisement Symptoms will be mild in most dogs, Greenstein said, though a small number will develop pneumonia and may experience a severe cough, intense fatigue, upset stomach or difficulty breathing. Fewer than 10% of dogs that contract the flu will die because of it. Like humans, the types of dogs most at risk for serious outcomes include ones that are young, old or pregnant, and those that have underlying health conditions that weaken their immune systems. It usually takes between two to four days for dogs to develop symptoms after they’ve been exposed to the virus. “During their incubation period, infected dogs may look clinically normal yet can spread the infection to other dogs,” Greenstein said. While you’ll want to quarantine your dogs from other pups, you don’t need to social distance from your pet, as there’s no evidence that dogs can spread canine flu to their humans.FatCamera via Getty ImagesA vet can assess whether your dog needs the canine influenza vaccine as a preventive measure or requires treatment for current illness.What’s Causing The Current Outbreaks?Two influenza strains have caused outbreaks among dogs across the U.S. in recent years: H3N2 and H3N8, both of which originated in other animal species before they mutated and spread to canines. H3N8 jumped from horses to dogs around 2004, and H3N2 — which is what’s triggering the current surge in cases — likely hopped from birds to dogs, first causing outbreaks domestically in 2015 and 2016.Advertisement According to Edward Dubovi, a professor in the Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences at Cornell University’s College of Veterinary Medicine, canine influenza initially made its way to the U.S. via dogs imported from Asia, where there was ongoing transmission. Since then, canine flu outbreaks have occurred on a yearly basis. “We have this continual threat of the import of infected dogs into the United States,” Dubovi said.Los Angeles was hit with a pretty bad outbreak in 2022, and this year the dog flu has spread in parts of the South and Northeast. When dogs travel — whether for vacation with owners or for adoption or show purposes — the flu spreads. “This virus goes through the U.S. by movement of sick dogs,” Dubovi said. Some veterinarians believe the resurgence of dog flu can also be attributed to people traveling and commuting to offices again after two pandemic years (and, therefore, putting their dogs in day care and boarding facilities). Here’s How To Prevent And Treat Dog FluThe canine influenza shot targets both the H3N8 and H3N2 strains. According to Dubovi, it’s a standard, chilled vaccine that won’t stop infection but will help prevent hospitalization and death. We don’t know exactly how efficacious the shot is, but past research suggests that it does a great job of preventing severe disease and reducing viral shedding. Advertisement “You might see some mild respiratory signs in your dog, but it should not progress to severe pneumonia and probably will not progress to the point you have to take your dog to the vet,” Dubovi said.We don’t have an antiviral for the dog flu, so if your dog tests positive, it’ll be treated like any other respiratory infection. Your vet will likely recommend rest and fluids and prescribe anti-inflammatory medications if a fever develops. Your pooch might also be put on antibiotics to prevent secondary infections. Dogs that get severely sick and develop pneumonia may need an IV and supportive oxygen, according to Greenstein.We Need Your SupportOther news outlets have retreated behind paywalls. At HuffPost, we believe journalism should be free for everyone.Would you help us provide essential information to our readers during this critical time? We can't do it without you.Can't afford to contribute? Support HuffPost by creating a free account and log in while you read.You've supported HuffPost before, and we'll be honest — we could use your help again. We view our mission to provide free, fair news as critically important in this crucial moment, and we can't do it without you.Whether you give once or many more times, we appreciate your contribution to keeping our journalism free for all.You've supported HuffPost before, and we'll be honest — we could use your help again. We view our mission to provide free, fair news as critically important in this crucial moment, and we can't do it without you.Whether you give just one more time or sign up again to contribute regularly, we appreciate you playing a part in keeping our journalism free for all.Support HuffPostAlready contributed? Log in to hide these messages.If you think your pup has the flu, talk to your vet. They’ll have a grasp on how prevalent canine influenza is in your area and can swab your dog to check for the flu and other respiratory infections. Most dogs will do just fine, but because things can go south in some pups, it’s worth getting them evaluated. “If you’re unsure about your dog’s condition, it’s always better to be safe than sorry and ask your family vet,” Greenstein said. Advertisement RelatedDogs PetsFluYes, The 'Puppy Blues' Are A Real Thing. Here's How To Cope.Cat Owners Aren't Taking Them To The Vet Enough. That's A Problem.Dogs Can Help You Live Longer, As If You Needed Another Reason To Get One Go to HomepageLEAVE A COMMENTSuggest a correction|Submit a tipAdvertisement From Our Partner From Our Partner HuffPost Shopping'sBest FindsNewsletter Sign UpThe Good LifeA completely essential daily guide to achieving the good life.Successfully Signed Up!Realness delivered to your inboxBy entering your email and clicking Sign Up, you're agreeing to let us send you customized marketing messages about us and our advertising partners. You are also agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. Close MORE IN WellnessMORE IN LIFE NEWSPOLITICSENTERTAINMENTLIFEVOICESHUFFPOST PERSONALSHOPPINGNEWSLETTERSAbout UsAdvertiseContact UsRSSFAQCareersUser AgreementComment PolicyDMCA PolicyHuffPost Press RoomAccessibility StatementPrivacy PolicyConsent PreferencesPrivacy SettingsPart of HuffPost Wellness. ©2024 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved.The Huffington PostAvian Influenza Driving Demand for Layer Chicks | Poultry News | lancasterfarming.com Skip to main content You have permission to edit this article. Edit Close Subscribe Today Mailbox Markets Register Log In My Account Log Out Site search Search Home E-Newspaper Archives Advertising Media Kit E-Newsletters Market Reports Business Directory Weather Farming News News Dairy Livestock Poultry Field Crops Produce Hemp Conservation Organic Ag Business Equipment & Machinery Country Life Family Food & Recipes Antiques & History Mid-Atlantic Horse Youth Gardening Outdoors Fairs & Shows Farmhouse Podcast Buy & Sell Mailbox Markets Classifieds Auctions Polls Merchandise Store Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Lancaster Farming P.O. Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 (717) 394-3047 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn TikTok Instagram Site search Search Subscribe Log In My Account Log Out Farming News Country Life Classifieds Auctions Mailbox Markets Avian Influenza Driving Demand for Layer Chicks Share this Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link LancasterFarming e-Newspapers November 11, 2024 52° 52° Avian Influenza Driving Demand for Layer Chicks Tom Venesky, tvenesky@lancasterfarming.com Feb 11, 2023 Feb 11, 2023 Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email KARRASTOCK Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link As consumers wait for egg prices and shortages to straighten out, another concern looms for commercial layer hen facilities.Hatcheries are faced with a challenge to keep up with flock losses from avian influenza and increased demand from people wanting their own backyard flocks for egg production.“We are seeing more demand for layer chicks, from both the backyard and commercial segments,” said Luke Weiss, chief financial officer at Hoover’s Hatchery in Rudd, Iowa — a supplier of eggs and chicks to several hatcheries in Pennsylvania. “So far (hatcheries) have been able to meet it, but I guess we’ll have to wait and see.” Egg prices have been driven up by the losses of layer flocks due to avian influenza, and the backyard flock trend continues.The needs of the commercial and backyard segments are different, however. Weiss said backyard poultry enthusiasts prefer a variety of breeds that lay different colored eggs. In the commercial industry, the needs are limited to a couple of breeds that lay either white or brown eggs.And it’s the availability of chicks to the commercial layer facilities that will determine what happens with egg prices and availability in the future.Chris Herr, executive vice president of PennAg Industries Association, said the commercial layer industry relies on a strict schedule. As layer flocks age, a new batch of chicks must be scheduled to hatch in time so they can be raised to pullets (17 to 20 weeks of age) and step right in so egg production continues uninterrupted.But with flocks being lost prematurely to avian influenza, along with increased demand for layer chicks in general, things can go awry.“When you have a disruption, you clearly have challenges,” Herr said. “It’s all very scheduled. You just don’t have an extra 20,000 birds around to immediately replace what was lost.”Still, it could be the strict adherence to scheduling that prevents a chick shortage from crippling the layer industry. According to Marc Dresner, director of integrated communications for the American Egg Board, avian influenza has yet to cause any impact to the supply or access to chicks needed by egg farms. Egg farmers normally plan their pullet flock schedules 12 to 18 months in advance, he said, and some chick suppliers report they have received orders as far out as 2027. "The point is that egg farmers know what they have coming and when, which in turn ensures that at any given time they have an uninterrupted supply of pullets approaching maturity," Dresner said. A wild card when it comes to availability of chicks has to do with the very beginning of the process - breeder flocks. According to Herr, there have been breeder flock losses from influenza, and these flocks produce the fertile eggs that are supplied to hatcheries to hatch chicks. Both a broiler and a layer flock in Pennsylvania were lost in 2022, Herr said.In addition, six layer flocks totaling 3.8 million birds were depopulated in Pennsylvania last spring, disrupting the process even more.Still, the industry is doing what it can to fill the void created by the lost flocks.According to Herr, some facilities are extending the lifespan of their laying flocks. Typically, the flocks are replaced when they molt — usually around 18 months of age — and younger pullets are brought in to continue egg production.If pullets aren’t readily available, or added egg production is needed to make up for the avian influenza losses, some facilities will allow their flocks to molt and then bring them back into production, Herr said. Sometimes, even if replacement pullets are available, the older flocks will be kept and additional barns will be opened to accommodate the higher numbers resulting from extending the lifespan of the chickens that have molted.“It may not be a level of egg production as high as normal, but by adjusting things like lighting and feed, they can bring them back into production,” he said. “Eighty percent of production is still better than having no flock at all.”Perhaps the biggest challenge in the entire egg conundrum is that avian influenza is still around, and its potential effect heading into spring is worrisome to producers. The spring migration is a concern as the risk increases due to the movement of wild birds.As of Feb. 1, a commercial duck flock and a backyard flock in Pennsylvania succumbed to the outbreak, resulting in a loss of 36,000 birds. Last year, the commercial poultry industry in the U.S. lost 55 million birds, and layers accounted for 44 million of the total.Dresner cautioned that the 44 million figure represents losses over the course of the year and not all at once. Nationwide, according to USDA data, there are currently more than 300 million hens laying eggs on farms across the U.S.—which is about 6% fewer hens laying eggs than normal. But with influenza still present, the risk to the poultry industry - both layers and broilers - hasn't waned. “We were holding our breath, understanding it often takes 18 to 24 months for these viruses to burn out,” Herr said. “We had a warmer winter, migration seemed to start earlier and we now have our first positive cases again in some of the most poultry-dense places in the state.“We were bracing for spring. Now, we’re in the midst of it.” Newsletter Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Breaking News Breaking news, sent straight to your inbox. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up By opting into newsletters you are agreeing to our privacy policy. From Our Partners What To Read Next Facebook Twitter WhatsApp SMS Email Print Copy article link More information Why Are Egg Prices So High and Will They Ever Come Down? While increased egg costs at the supermarket haven’t gone over-easy with consumers, industry experts expect prices to crack relatively soon. Taking Lessons From Pennsylvania’s First Avian Influenza Case in Nearly 40 Years Kreider Farms had Pennsylvania's first outbreak of the disease in nearly 40 years last spring. Its experience shows the complexity of responding to the disease, which has infected close to 40 farms in the state. Green Dragon Auction Under Bird Ban as Avian Flu Returns to Pennsylvania Due to recent USDA-confirmed cases of avian influenza in the area, the Green Dragon Small Animal Auction will likely be without birds for another month. Poultry Panel Sees Potential in Pennsylvania Four panelists representing different sectors of the poultry industry, including broilers, laying hens, ducks and turkeys, all see similar paths for the future — growth. Delmarva’s $4.8 Billion Chicken Industry Was Accidentally Hatched 100 Years Ago Throughout 2023, the Delmarva Chicken Association will be celebrating 100 years of operations, which all started with a mistaken delivery. Tags Lfavianflu Zoology Food Zootechnics The Economy Industry Trade Business Medicine Sign up for our e-Newsletters! Success! An email has been sent to with a link to confirm list signup. Error! There was an error processing your request. Lancaster Farming News Breaking News Country Life Dairy News Field Crops News Industrial Hemp News Livestock News Mid-Atlantic Horse News Poultry News You must select at least one email list. Please enter a valid email address. Sign up Sections News Farming News Country Life Classifieds Business Directory Auctions Mailbox Markets Ancestry Archives Quick Links Subscribe Submit a Classified Liner Ad Contacts Advertising Media Kit Where to Buy Manage Subscription Merchandise Store CONTACT US LancasterFarming.com 21 W Main St, PO Box 609 Ephrata, PA 17522 Phone: (717) 394-3047 Email: Farming@LancasterFarming.com Follow Us Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube TikTok Pinterest Instagram × Browser Compatibility Your browser is out of date and potentially vulnerable to security risks.We recommend switching to one of the following browsers: Microsoft Edge Google Chrome Firefox Copyright © 2024 Lancaster Farming Privacy PolicyTerms of UseCareers ;What to know about the bird flu outbreak killing poultry, wild birdsSkip to main content HomeElection 2024Voter GuideNewsCrime & CourtsLocal NewsPolitiknoxEducationStateNational PoliticsNews ColumnistsUSA TodayDatabasesEclipseSmall TownWomen Of The CenturyThe American SouthCoronavirus Bird flu: Black vultures dying, mammals getting infected. Are humans at risk?Bird flu is highly contagious and only takes one sick bird to begin spreading.Devarrick Turner Knoxville News SentinelShow Caption Hide Caption Bird flu, soaring costs cause egg prices to skyrocketAnyone going to buy a dozen eggs these days will have to be ready to pay up because the lingering bird flu outbreak, combined with soaring feed, fuel and labor costs, has led to prices more than doubling over the past year. (Jan. 10) (AP video: Teresa Crawford, Carrie Antlfinger)APAround 100 dead black vultures have been spotted recently around Knoxville and surrounding areas, deaths that the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency suspects might be caused by avian influenza, better known as bird flu.So should Knoxville residents be concerned for their own health?Tennessee is currently seeing large die-offs of black vultures, Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency biologist Scott Dykes told Knox News. But the status of less visible species is a larger challenge to determine, especially as the death of wild birds and poultry reach record numbers. “Our concern is what we don’t know,” Dykes said.The world’s largest outbreak of avian influenza began in February 2022 and has infected nearly 60 million birds, resulting in the loss of over 40 million hens and high egg prices, and now it’s starting to infect mammals such as raccoons, foxes and skunks.Is an outbreak among humans next? The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said human risk is minimal.Here's what you need to know about the outbreak and precautions you should take.How is bird flu spread among birds?Birds can infect other birds with avian influenza through their saliva, nasal secretions, prolonged proximity to each other, contaminated surfaces and carcasses.Wild birds can easily infect backyard poultry through shared food and sources of water.Bird flu is highly contagious and only takes one sick bird to begin spreading.Should I be worried about getting bird flu?It is rare for people to be infected with bird flu, according to the CDC.The CDC considers the current outbreak to be a low risk to the general public’s health and is “primarily an animal health issue.”There’s a higher risk for people who work with or have recreational contact with birds, especially without gloves or respiratory or eye protection.Only one person has been infected in the U.S. since April 2022, according to the CDC. Only four cases have ever been reported in the U.S.Are eggs and poultry safe to eat during the outbreak?Eggs and poultry from grocery stores are safe to eat, the U.S. Department of Agriculture has stated.The chances of eggs from infected poultry entering the food chain supply are low because of USDA safeguards.Infected chickens and turkeys are easily detected due to the rapid onset of symptoms.Bird flu risks become even lower when food is stored and prepared properly.What’s the current outbreak status and how are mammals infected?More than 58 million birds have been infected, resulting in the loss of more than 43 million egg-laying hens and subsequent high egg prices, the USDA reported.Bird flu has begun to spread in mammals such as racoons, foxes and skunks. None of these cases have been in Tennessee, according to the USDA database.Mammals typically are infected by eating infected birds.Mammal infections might increase as more wild birds such as vultures, ducks and geese become sick.What precautions should I take?Don’t handle dead birds, biologist Scott Dykes advised.Wear protective gloves, eye, mouth, and nose gear if handling living or dead birds.Watch pets for symptoms if they bring in a dead bird.Contact the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency to report large numbers of dead birds.Devarrick Turner is a trending news reporter for Knox News. He can be reached by email at devarrick.turner@knoxnews.com. Follow Devarrick on Twitter @dturner1208. Enjoy exclusive content and premium perks while supporting strong local journalism by subscribing at knoxnews.com/subscribe. Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024How one virus can block anotherSkip to contentBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveHomeNewsIsrael-Gaza WarWar in UkraineUS & CanadaUKUK PoliticsEnglandN. IrelandN. Ireland PoliticsScotlandScotland PoliticsWalesWales PoliticsAfricaAsiaChinaIndiaAustraliaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastIn PicturesBBC InDepthBBC VerifyUS ElectionFull resultsKamala HarrisDonald TrumpJD VanceTim WalzSportBusinessExecutive LoungeTechnology of BusinessFuture of BusinessInnovationTechnologyScience & HealthArtificial IntelligenceAI v the MindCultureFilm & TVMusicArt & DesignStyleBooksEntertainment NewsArtsArts in MotionTravelDestinationsAfricaAntarcticaAsiaAustralia and PacificCaribbean & BermudaCentral AmericaEuropeMiddle EastNorth AmericaSouth AmericaWorld’s TableCulture & ExperiencesAdventuresThe SpeciaListEarthNatural WondersWeather & ScienceClimate SolutionsSustainable BusinessGreen LivingVideoLiveLive NewsLive SportHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherNewslettersHow one virus can block anotherGetty ImagesWhen you get one virus, can you get another one at the same time? (Credit: Getty Images)This winter's "tripledemic" is one of several recent odd trends among respiratory virus infections. Viruses, it turns out, can block one another and take turns to dominate.Three years into the pandemic, Covid-19 is still going strong, causing wave after wave as case numbers soar, subside, then ascend again. But this past autumn saw something new – or rather, something old: the return of the flu. Plus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) – a virus that makes few headlines in normal years – ignited in its own surge, creating a "tripledemic".The surges in these old foes were particularly striking because flu and RSV all but disappeared during the first two winters of the pandemic. Even more surprising, one particular version of the flu may have gone extinct during the early Covid-19 pandemic. The World Health Organization's surveillance programme has not definitively detected the B/Yamagata flu strain since March 2020. (Read more from BBC Future about how viruses go extinct.)"I don't think anyone is going to stick their neck out and say it's gone just yet," says Richard Webby, a virologist at St Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis. But, he adds, "we hope it got squeezed out." Such an extinction would be a super rare event, Webby says.But then, the past few years have been highly unusual times for human-virus relations, and lockdowns and masks went a long way toward preventing flu and RSV from infiltrating human nostrils. Still, Webby thinks another factor may have kept them at bay while Covid-19 raged. It's called viral interference, and it simply means that the presence of one virus can block another.Looking back over the past couple of years, I'm pretty confident in saying that Covid can certainly block flu and RSV – Richard WebbyViral interference can happen in individual cells in the laboratory, and in individual animals and people exposed to multiple viruses – but it can also play out across entire populations, if enough people get one virus for it to hinder the flourishing of others at scale. This results in waves of infections by individual viruses that take turns to dominate. "Looking back over the past couple of years, I'm pretty confident in saying that Covid can certainly block flu and RSV," Webby says.Getty ImagesIt may be a while before we can be sure, but it looks likely that Covid-19 could block flu and RSV (Credit: Getty Images)It wouldn't be the first time that scientists have observed such patterns. Back in 2009, for example, the virus to fear was swine flu, which had jumped from pigs to people in spring of that year. It looked poised to ramp up as autumn arrived – but suddenly, in some parts of Europe, it stagnated. The rhinovirus, responsible for the common cold and likely spread by children returning to school, took centre stage for a series of weeks before swine flu recaptured dominance. That flu strain then delayed the typical autumn rise of RSV by as much as two and a half months.Running interferenceThere are a number of ways that interference can happen in the body. One occurs when two viruses use the same molecule to gain entry into host cells. If virus A gets there first, and grabs on to all those molecular doorknobs, then virus B will have no opportunity to enter.Another kind of interference might happen if two viruses compete for the same resources inside the cell, such as the machinery to make new viral proteins or the means to escape that cell to infect others. "Think of it as a race between two viruses," Webby says. Don't go counting on a cold granting you temporary immunity from other viruses. Interference isn't guaranteedBut the best-understood method of interference concerns a defensive molecule called interferon that's made by cells of all animals with backbones (and possibly some invertebrates too). Indeed, viral interference is the reason interferon got its name to begin with. When a cell senses a virus, any virus, it starts making interferon. And that, in turn, activates a slew of defensive genes. Some of the products of those genes work inside the cell or at its boundaries, where they prevent additional viruses from entering and block viruses already present from replicating or exiting the cell.Cells secrete interferon into their surroundings, warning other cells to put up their guard. The result of all this: If a second virus then comes along, cells have their defences already activated, and they may be able to shut it out.This "beware" message can spread throughout the body. So, in theory, getting a respiratory virus such as the rhinovirus could activate defences in, say, the gut, protecting the same person from an entirely different virus, such as norovirus. But the situation will vary depending on the viruses involved, the amount of interferon produced, and other factors. "Most of the viruses themselves have ways to neutralise the interferon system," says Ganes Sen, a virologist at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio, who wrote about the interactions between interferon and viruses for the Annual Review of Virology in 2015. "It's a tug of war."Scientists study that back-and-forth in animals and other systems in the laboratory. For example, Ellen Foxman, an immunologist at Yale School of Medicine, investigates viral interactions in lab-grown tissues made from real human airway cells. In one experiment, she studied swine flu and a typical representative of the rhinovirus family. When Foxman and her co-authors Anchi Wu, Valia Mihaylova and Marie Landry infected the human tissue first with the rhinovirus, and then with swine flu, interferon prevented the flu from getting a foothold. In similar studies, Foxman found that rhinovirus infection also interfered with subsequent Sars-CoV-2 infection (the virus that causes Covid-19).Getty ImagesWhile some viruses can block others, it is still possible to get two viruses at once (Credit: Getty Images)It's not always reliable to extrapolate from tissues in the laboratory to people or populations, but Foxman thinks the studies reflect biological truth. "It's probable that if you get a rhinovirus infection, that's going to make you relatively resistant to another virus for some period of time," she says. Foxman speculates that the protective effect probably lasts days or weeks.But don't go counting on a cold granting you temporary immunity from other viruses. Interference isn't guaranteed. It's certainly possible to catch more than one virus at the same time. And interferon isn't always beneficial, either – sometimes, it can make people more susceptible to infection, not less. A well-known example is that the flu makes people more susceptible to a secondary bacterial infection.In the ongoing pandemic, it's still hard to say how much of a role, if any, interference played in shutting down RSV and flu in populations around the globe. During the first Covid wave in 2020, Foxman thinks that not enough people had Covid for it to be interfering with other viruses on a grand scale. (RSV underwent an unusual summer peak in 2021 as people eased up on masking and other precautions.)But by the second Covid winter, in 2021-22, Webby thinks he sees population-level evidence for interference. Influenza was starting to pick up in the fall, he says, but then the omicron variant of Covid burst onto the scene. Flu rates fell – even though people were back at work and school and traveling for the holidays. The coronavirus had a big advantage that season, he says, because many people still lacked immunity to it. It doesn't mean Covid will always edge out influenza in the future.In the third Covid winter now underway in the Northern Hemisphere, conditions are different yet again. Many people now have immunity to Covid, from a recent bout or from vaccination, but fewer have experienced RSV or flu in recent memory. That set the scene for flu and RSV to stage a massive dual comeback, hitting early and hard.Any potential interference during the present tripledemic winter will become more obvious once epidemiologists can look back on the season and see if each virus took its turn. Already, there are indicators that the fall surges of RSV and flu might have peaked, while Covid is on the upswing after the winter holidays. But there are still several cold months to come, providing ample opportunity for any of the trio to rise again.--This article originally appeared in Knowable Magazine, and is republished under a Creative Commons licence.--Join one million Future fans by liking us on Facebook, or follow us on Twitter or Instagram.If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter, called "The Essential List" – a handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Culture, Worklife, Travel and Reel delivered to your inbox every Friday.VirusHealthCovid-19WatchWhy is ADHD so surrounded by myth?Do social media, some common assumptions and two Scottish women hold the answers?17 May 2023HealthThe truth about the most physically active generationGen Z may lead the way when it comes to a healthy lifestyle, but is Gen Z the healthiest generation overall?18 Apr 2023HealthIs Gen Z the healthiest generation?With all the advantages of the modern world, which generation is the healthiest?18 Apr 2023HealthDoes alcohol affect male fertility?Which external factors affect male sperm count and why.23 Feb 2022HealthLördagsgodis: Why Swedes only eat sweets on SaturdaysWhy Swedes only eat sweets on Saturdays.23 Feb 2022HealthIs it possible to 'hack' your own immune system?Many of us are keen to find ways to optimise our immune system - but is it possible?23 Feb 2022HealthCan science reverse the ageing process?Just how far can we intervene in the way our bodies age?23 Feb 2022HealthHow one woman's 'immortal' cells changed the worldIn 1951, a young woman from Baltimore died of cancer. Her death would change medical science forever.23 Feb 2022HealthWhat happened after this country decriminalised all drugs?The country had one of the worst rates of overdose deaths in Europe.23 Feb 2022HealthHow to keep recharged and avoid emotional burnoutHere are some expert tips for avoiding burnout before you're already burn out.23 Feb 2022HealthWhy a Dutch wellness trend is taking the world by stormFeeling stressed? The Dutch trend, Koeknuffelen, might be just the thing for you.23 Feb 2022HealthHow did coronavirus start and spread?In this episode of My World, we have everything you need to know about coronavirus.23 Feb 2022HealthWhy you're washing your hands wrongA virologist demonstrates how germs spread and what the best methods are to avoid catching a virus.23 Feb 2022HealthWhat are viruses? And how do they spread?Concerns are growing that the recently-detected coronavirus may spread around the world.23 Feb 2022HealthThe radioactive 'capital' of the worldThe Czech mining town Jachymov is home to the most important discovery in the field of radioactivity.23 Feb 2022HealthJapan's forest of healingForest bathing is a popular activity for the urbanised and stressed Japanese becoming cut off from nature.23 Feb 2022HealthWhy drinking too much water could be life-threateningMarathon runner Johanna Pakenham was rushed to the hospital after drinking five litres of water.23 Feb 2022Health'A new generation of nicotine addicts'Unpacking the dangers behind the US vaping craze23 Feb 2022HealthWhat happens when you age?The experiment that makes you grow old in an afternoon23 Feb 2022HealthWhy are people in the USA living shorter lives?Nobel Prize-winning economist Sir Angus Deaton says these "deaths of despair" are driven by inequality.23 Feb 2022HealthMore2 hrs agoNHS offers 'improved' stop smoking pillPeople in England will be able to get free varenicline tablets to help them quit cigarettes. 2 hrs agoHealth7 hrs agoCovid inquiry told Treasury blocked NHS bed requestNHS England chief executive Amanda Pritchard says the decision, in July 2020, was very disappointing.7 hrs agoHealth8 hrs agoPaterson was a divisive character - medic An inquest into patients linked to Ian Paterson is told the disgraced surgeon was seen as difficult.8 hrs agoBirmingham & Black Country8 hrs agoMother-of-two dies during Turkey weight-loss opJanet Savage paid £2,750 for the procedure but stopped breathing during surgery.8 hrs agoWales10 hrs agoHealth staff pay deals cannot be matched, says NesbittThe health minister predicts difficult conversations with unions over pay due to budget problems.10 hrs agoNorthern Ireland PoliticsBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherBBC ShopBBC in other languagesFollow BBC on:Terms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpContact the BBCAdvertise with usDo not share or sell my infoContact technical supportCopyright 2024 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.US Cold & Flu season slows in early Jan - IQVIA Regions Americas Asia & Oceania Europe Middle East & Africa Americas Americas Argentina Brasil Canada Colombia Ecuador Mexico United States Asia & Oceania Asia & Oceania Asia Pacific Australia & NZ 中国 India Japan 대한민국 Southeast Asia Sri Lanka Europe A-I Adriatic Belgium Bulgaria Czech Republic Deutschland España France Greece Hungary Ireland Israel Italia J-Z Nederland Nordics Poland Portugal Romania Russia Slovakia Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom EMEA Thought Leadership Developing IQVIA’s positions on key trends in the pharma and life sciences industries, with a focus on EMEA. Learn more Middle East & Africa Middle East & Africa Middle East and Africa EMEA Thought Leadership Developing IQVIA’s positions on key trends in the pharma and life sciences industries, with a focus on EMEA. Learn more English regions search Artboard 1 MAIN/REGIONS regions/ Regions Americas Asia & Oceania Europe Middle East & Africa Americas Americas Argentina Brasil Canada Colombia Ecuador Mexico United States Asia & Oceania Asia & Oceania Asia Pacific Australia & NZ 中国 India Japan 대한민국 Southeast Asia Sri Lanka Europe Europe Adriatic Belgium Bulgaria Czech Republic Deutschland España France Greece Hungary Ireland Israel Italia Nederland Nordics Poland Portugal Romania Russia Slovakia Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom EMEA Thought Leadership Developing IQVIA’s positions on key trends in the pharma and life sciences industries, with a focus on EMEA. Learn more Middle East & Africa Middle East & Africa Middle East and Africa EMEA Thought Leadership Developing IQVIA’s positions on key trends in the pharma and life sciences industries, with a focus on EMEA. Learn more Solutions quick find a capability SOLUTIONS Research & Development Real World Evidence Commercialization Safety & Regulatory Compliance Technologies LIFE SCIENCE SEGMENTS Consumer Health Emerging Biopharma Generics MedTech Pharmaceutical Manufacturers HEALTHCARE SEGMENTS Information Partner Services Financial Institutions Global Public Health Government Patient Associations Payers Providers THERAPEUTIC AREAS Cardiovascular Cell and Gene Therapy Central Nervous System GI & Hepatology Infectious Diseases and Vaccines Oncology Pediatrics Rare Diseases View All Impacting People's Lives We strive to help improve outcomes and create a healthier, more sustainable world for people everywhere. LEARN MORE Harness the power to transform clinical development Reimagine clinical development by intelligently connecting data, technology, and analytics to optimize your trials. The result? Faster decision making and reduced risk so you can deliver life-changing therapies faster. Research & Development Overview Research & Development Quick Links Clinical Trials Functional Services Decentralized Trials Consulting Therapeutic Expertise Site and Investigators Global Laboratories Real World Evidence. Real Confidence. Real Results. Generate and disseminate evidence that answers crucial clinical, regulatory and commercial questions, enabling you to drive smarter decisions and meet your stakeholder needs with confidence. REAL WORLD EVIDENCE OVERVIEW Real World Evidence Quick Links Real World & Health Data Sets Medical Affairs Health Data Apps & AI Health Data Transformation Study Design Evidence Networks Health Economics & Value Regulatory and Safety Natural Language Processing Real World Evidence Library See markets more clearly. Opportunities more often. Elevate commercial models with precision and speed using AI-driven analytics and technology that illuminate hidden insights in data. COMMERCIALIZATION OVERVIEW Commercialization Quick Links COVID-19 & Commercialization Launch Strategy & Management Brand Strategy & Management Pricing & Market Access Healthcare Professional Engagement Patient Engagement and Support Promotional Strategy Established Brands Optimization Service driven. Tech-enabled. Integrated compliance. Orchestrate your success across the complete compliance lifecycle with best-in-class services and solutions for safety, regulatory, quality and medical information. COMPLIANCE OVERVIEW Safety & Regulatory Compliance Quick Links Safety Pharmacovigilance Regulatory Compliance Quality Compliance Medical Information Commercial Compliance Intelligence that transforms life sciences end-to-end. When your destination is a healthier world, making intelligent connections between data, technology, and services is your roadmap. TECHNOLOGIES OVERVIEW Technology Quick Links Orchestrated Clinical Trials Enterprise Information Management Performance Management & Insights Provider Reference Data Network Customer Engagement Commercial Compliance Safety, Regulatory, Quality Compliance Developer Partner Programs Technology Insights Products CLINICAL PRODUCTS Planning Suite Grant Plan Site Suite Clinical Trial Payments Investigator Site Portal One Home for Sites Patient Engagement Suite Electronic Clinical Outcome Assessment (eCOA) Interactive Response Technology (IRT) Clinical Data Analytics Solutions COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS Information Management Launch Strategy & Management Pricing & Market Access Brand Strategy & Management Promotional Engagement Performance Management & Insights Orchestrated Analytics Next Best Action Customer Engagement (OCE) Patient Engagement and Support COMPLIANCE, SAFETY, REG PRODUCTS IQVIA Vigilance Platform Commercial Compliance Regulatory Compliance RIM Smart Quality Compliance SmartSolve eQMS Safety & Pharmacovigilance REAL WORLD PRODUCTS Health Data Apps & AI Analytics Research Accelerator​ Expert Ecosystem​ AI Patient & HCP Profiling- Commercial AI Patient & Provider Profiling- Med Affairs​ AI Patient & HCP Profiling- Healthcare​ Natural Language Processing Market Access Insights Direct-to-Patient Research CASE STUDY Data in a Day LEARN MORE Insights BLOGS, WHITE PAPERS & CASE STUDIES Explore our library of insights, thought leadership, and the latest topics & trends in healthcare. DISCOVER INSIGHTS THE IQVIA INSTITUTE An in-depth exploration of the global healthcare ecosystem with timely research, insightful analysis, and scientific expertise. SEE LATEST REPORTS INSTITUTE REPORT Global Trends in R&D 2024 READ MORE EMEA Insights IQVIA thought leadership with a focus on EMEA. Learn more WHITE PAPER DCTs Deliver Big ROI LEARN MORE WHITE PAPER Capturing value at scale: The $4 billion RWE imperative LEARN MORE About FEATURED INNOVATIONS IQVIA Connected Intelligence™ IQVIA Healthcare-grade AI™ IQVIA AI Assistant Human Data Science Cloud IQVIA Innovation Hub Decentralized Trials Patient Experience Solutions with Apple devices WHO WE ARE Our Story Our Impact Commitment to Public Health Code of Conduct Environmental Social Governance Privacy Executive Team NEWS & RESOURCES News Events & Webinars Industry Analyst Reports COVID-19 Resources Our Locations INVESTOR RELATIONS Visit our investor relations site for more information. LEARN MORE Unlock your potential to drive healthcare forward By making intelligent connections between your needs, our capabilities, and the healthcare ecosystem, we can help you be more agile, accelerate results, and improve patient outcomes. LEARN MORE IQVIA AI is Healthcare-grade AI Building on a rich history of developing AI for healthcare, IQVIA AI connects the right data, technology, and expertise to address the unique needs of healthcare. It's what we call Healthcare-grade AI. LEARN MORE Meet the IQVIA AI Assistant Your new expert analyst is here. Be at the forefront of data-driven decision-making with a new generative AI tool that enables you to interact with our products and solutions like never before. Get results you can trust, faster. LEARN MORE Your healthcare data deserves more than just a cloud. The IQVIA Human Data Science Cloud is our unique capability designed to enable healthcare-grade analytics, tools, and data management solutions to deliver fit-for-purpose global data at scale. LEARN MORE Innovations make an impact when bold ideas meet powerful partnerships The IQVIA Innovation Hub connects start-ups with the extensive IQVIA network of assets, resources, clients, and partners. Together, we can help lead the future of healthcare with the extensive IQVIA network of assets, resources, clients, and partners. LEARN MORE Proven, faster DCT solutions IQVIA Decentralized Trials deliver purpose-built clinical services and technologies that engage the right patients wherever they are. Our hybrid and fully virtual solutions have been used more than any others. LEARN MORE IQVIA Patient Experience Solutions with Apple devices Empowering patients to personalize their healthcare and connecting them to caregivers has the potential to change the care delivery paradigm. LEARN MORE Careers WORKING AT IQVIA Our mission is to accelerate innovation for a healthier world. Together, we can solve customer challenges and improve patient lives. LEARN MORE LIFE AT IQVIA Careers, culture and everything in between. Find out what’s going on right here, right now. LEARN MORE WE’RE HIRING Improving human health requires brave thinkers who are willing to explore new ideas and build on successes. Unleash your potential with us. SEARCH JOBS Contact Us REGIONS Search Solutions Products Insights About Careers Contact Us MAIN/search search MAIN/Solutions Solutions/ SOLUTIONS Research & Development Real World Evidence Commercialization Safety & Regulatory Compliance Technologies LIFE SCIENCE SEGMENTS Consumer Health Emerging Biopharma Generics MedTech Pharmaceutical Manufacturers HEALTHCARE SEGMENTS Information Partner Services Financial Institutions Global Public Health Government Patient Associations Payers Providers THERAPEUTIC AREAS Cardiovascular Cell and Gene Therapy Central Nervous System GI & Hepatology Infectious Diseases and Vaccines Oncology Pediatrics Rare Diseases View All Impacting People's Lives "We strive to help improve outcomes and create a healthier, more sustainable world for people everywhere. LEARN MORE Harness the power to transform clinical development Reimagine clinical development by intelligently connecting data, technology, and analytics to optimize your trials. The result? Faster decision making and reduced risk so you can deliver life-changing therapies faster. Research & Development Overview Research & Development Quick Links Clinical Trials Functional Services Decentralized Trials Consulting Therapeutic Expertise Site and Investigators Global Laboratories Real World Evidence. Real Confidence. Real Results. Generate and disseminate evidence that answers crucial clinical, regulatory and commercial questions, enabling you to drive smarter decisions and meet your stakeholder needs with confidence. REAL WORLD EVIDENCE OVERVIEW Real World Evidence Quick Links Real World & Health Data Sets Medical Affairs Health Data Apps & AI Health Data Transformation Study Design Evidence Networks Health Economics & Value Regulatory and Safety Natural Language Processing Real World Evidence Library See markets more clearly. Opportunities more often. Elevate commercial models with precision and speed using AI-driven analytics and technology that illuminate hidden insights in data. COMMERCIALIZATION OVERVIEW Commercialization Quick Links COVID-19 & Commercialization Launch Strategy & Management Brand Strategy & Management Pricing & Market Access Healthcare Professional Engagement Patient Engagement and Support Promotional Strategy Established Brands Optimization Service driven. Tech-enabled. Integrated compliance. Orchestrate your success across the complete compliance lifecycle with best-in-class services and solutions for safety, regulatory, quality and medical information. COMPLIANCE OVERVIEW Safety & Regulatory Compliance Quick Links Safety Pharmacovigilance Regulatory Compliance Quality Compliance Medical Information Commercial Compliance Intelligence that transforms life sciences end-to-end. When your destination is a healthier world, making intelligent connections between data, technology, and services is your roadmap. TECHNOLOGIES OVERVIEW Technology Quick Links Orchestrated Clinical Trials Enterprise Information Management Performance Management & Insights Provider Reference Data Network Customer Engagement Commercial Compliance Safety, Regulatory, Quality Compliance Developer Partner Programs Technology Insights MAIN/Products Products/ CLINICAL PRODUCTS Planning Suite Grant Plan Site Suite Clinical Trial Payments Investigator Site Portal One Home for Sites Patient Engagement Suite Electronic Clinical Outcome Assessment (eCOA) Interactive Response Technology (IRT) Clinical Data Analytics Solutions COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS Information Management Launch Strategy & Management Pricing & Market Access Brand Strategy & Management Promotional Engagement Performance Management & Insights Orchestrated Analytics Next Best Action Customer Engagement (OCE) Patient Engagement and Support COMPLIANCE, SAFETY, REG PRODUCTS IQVIA Vigilance Platform Commercial Compliance Regulatory Compliance RIM Smart Quality Compliance SmartSolve eQMS Safety & Pharmacovigilance REAL WORLD PRODUCTS Health Data Apps & AI Analytics Research Accelerator​ Expert Ecosystem​ AI Patient & HCP Profiling- Commercial AI Patient & Provider Profiling- Med Affairs​ AI Patient & HCP Profiling- Healthcare​ Natural Language Processing Market Access Insights Direct-to-Patient Research CASE STUDY "Data in a Day LEARN MORE MAIN/Insights Insights/ BLOGS, WHITE PAPERS & CASE STUDIES Explore our library of insights, thought leadership, and the latest topics & trends in healthcare. DISCOVER INSIGHTS THE IQVIA INSTITUTE An in-depth exploration of the global healthcare ecosystem with timely research, insightful analysis, and scientific expertise. SEE LATEST REPORTS INSTITUTE REPORT "Global Trends in R&D 2024 READ MORE EMEA Insights "IQVIA thought leadership with a focus on EMEA. Learn more WHITE PAPER "DCTs Deliver Big ROI LEARN MORE WHITE PAPER "Capturing value at scale: The $4 billion RWE imperative LEARN MORE MAIN/About About/ FEATURED INNOVATIONS IQVIA Connected Intelligence™ IQVIA Healthcare-grade AI™ IQVIA AI Assistant Human Data Science Cloud IQVIA Innovation Hub Decentralized Trials Patient Experience Solutions with Apple devices WHO WE ARE Our Story Our Impact Commitment to Public Health Code of Conduct Environmental Social Governance Privacy Executive Team NEWS & RESOURCES News Events & Webinars Industry Analyst Reports COVID-19 Resources Our Locations INVESTOR RELATIONS "Visit our investor relations site for more information. LEARN MORE Unlock your potential to drive healthcare forward By making intelligent connections between your needs, our capabilities, and the healthcare ecosystem, we can help you be more agile, accelerate results, and improve patient outcomes. LEARN MORE IQVIA AI is Healthcare-grade AI Building on a rich history of developing AI for healthcare, IQVIA AI connects the right data, technology, and expertise to address the unique needs of healthcare. It's what we call Healthcare-grade AI. LEARN MORE Meet the IQVIA AI Assistant Your new expert analyst is here. Be at the forefront of data-driven decision-making with a new generative AI tool that enables you to interact with our products and solutions like never before. Get results you can trust, faster. LEARN MORE Your healthcare data deserves more than just a cloud. The IQVIA Human Data Science Cloud is our unique capability designed to enable healthcare-grade analytics, tools, and data management solutions to deliver fit-for-purpose global data at scale. LEARN MORE Innovations make an impact when bold ideas meet powerful partnerships The IQVIA Innovation Hub connects start-ups with the extensive IQVIA network of assets, resources, clients, and partners. Together, we can help lead the future of healthcare with the extensive IQVIA network of assets, resources, clients, and partners. LEARN MORE Proven, faster DCT solutions IQVIA Decentralized Trials deliver purpose-built clinical services and technologies that engage the right patients wherever they are. Our hybrid and fully virtual solutions have been used more than any others. LEARN MORE IQVIA Patient Experience Solutions with Apple devices Empowering patients to personalize their healthcare and connecting them to caregivers has the potential to change the care delivery paradigm. LEARN MORE MAIN/Careers Careers/ WORKING AT IQVIA Our mission is to accelerate innovation for a healthier world. Together, we can solve customer challenges and improve patient lives. LEARN MORE LIFE AT IQVIA Careers, culture and everything in between. Find out what’s going on right here, right now. LEARN MORE WE’RE HIRING "Improving human health requires brave thinkers who are willing to explore new ideas and build on successes. Unleash your potential with us. SEARCH JOBS MAIN/Contact Us Contact Us/ Blog US Cold & Flu season slows in early Jan Matt Stewart, Global Marketing Manager, IQVIA Consumer Health Feb 10, 2023 Blogs US Cold & Flu season slows in early Jan Share PAGE Copy Link After a rapid start, with record levels of flu incidences over the baseline 3-year average according to IQVIA’s FAN Flu/Cold/Respiratory Activity Notification Program in the fall and early winter, the cough, cold and flu (CCF) season in the world’s biggest OTC market has taken a dip. In final week of 2022, the estimated level of total influenza cases in the US was 2.1-times the same level of the corresponding week of the baseline period – three-year average of 2016/17, 2017/18, 2018/19, - further strengthening the likelihood that we are experiencing unusually high levels of incidence over the total season, however by mid-January a slow down had taken full effect with illnesses trending in line with the most recent 3-year seasonal average (see Exhibit 1). Despite the tail off, the early season boom in incidences meant the Q4 levels were 42% up on what was an unusually mild 2021/2022 season. Exhibit 1 – Estimated number of total US influenza cases 2012-2022 through the week ending 14 Jan 2022 (Source: IQVIA Consumer Health FAN; IQVIA Institute) This drop off brings the US season in line to the one witnessed in Australia, which started fast but then dropped off rapidlyi. Pediatric levels still elevated The level of influenza incidence in children remains at elevated levels, but we are seeing this tail off, with incidences in the most recent week of 14 January down by 42% over the prior 2 weeks (see Exhibit 2). This comes after a Q4 which had trended 28.9% higher than the prior year Q4. As the season enters the later stages, pediatric incidences have now sharply dipped down to the 3-year season average. Exhibit 2 – Estimated number of total US pediatric influenza cases 2012-2022 through the week ending 14 Jan 2022 (Source: IQVIA Consumer Health FAN; IQVIA Institute) A rise is on the cards However, over the next couple of weeks both adult and pediatric incidences should start to trend over the last two seasons and this trend should continue through February and March. Regional illness levels continue to be very different across the US, so when looking ahead Brand Managers should evaluate where they should be investing their promotional dollars to get the best ROI as the CC&F season runs out. Keep an eye out in the coming months for IQVIA Consumer Health’s round-up of the 2022/2023 cough, cold and flu season and preview to the upcoming US allergy season and for more information on IQVIA’s FAN Flu/Cold/Respiratory Activity Notification Program please contact: Chip Schaible - chip.schaible@iqvia.com i IQVIA Consumer Health QuickView – 2022 US Cold and Flu Season Starts with a Bang You may also be interested in Article Looking ahead to changes in HealthTech Presentation Belgian Consumer Health Market Article Got A Question About Your Study Status? Presentation Belgian Consumer Health Market Brochure Updates for Dossier Submission: Key Changes in the 3rd Edition for Listing Medicines with the Malaysia Ministry of Health Brochure IQVIA WellTrack Prev Next Related solutions Consumer Health Shape the future of consumer health. Commercialization and Lifecycle Management Adapt fast, maintain momentum and stay relevant Industry Segments See how we partner with organizations across the healthcare ecosystem, from emerging biotechnology and large pharmaceutical, to medical technology, consumer health, and more, to drive human health forward. Contact Us ©2024 IQVIA Inc, All Rights Reserved. Investor Relations Customer Portal Careers Code of Conduct Events Contact Us Third-Party Access Suppliers Privacy Your Privacy Choices Terms of Use Sitemap © 2018-2024. All rights reserved. IQVIA® is a registered trademark of IQVIA Inc. in the United States, the European Union, and various other countries. © 2018-2024. All rights reserved. IQVIA® is a registered trademark of IQVIA Inc. in the United States, the European Union, and various other countries.Bird flu outbreak reported in Leake County Subscribe Philadelphia, MS | MON., NOV. 11, 2024 | 74° F, CLEAR Forecast Log in Advertise Subscribe Subscribe News Sports Classifieds Submit Classifieds Obituaries Editorials Calendar Submit Anniversary announcement Birth announcement Birthday announcement Engagement announcement Obituary announcement Wedding announcement Change of address Delivery issues Vacation stop Letters to the Editor Submit news Legal Notices Features Agriculture Automotive Books Business Education & Careers Entertainment Food Gardening Green Living Health Home Improvement Kids & Family Lifestyle Money Matters Outdoors Pets Real estate Seniors Spanish Tech Travel Trivia, History & Games Society Public Notices Toggle navigation Main menu Log in E-edition Subscribe News Sports Classifieds Submit Classifieds Obituaries Editorials Calendar Submit Anniversary announcement Birth announcement Birthday announcement Engagement announcement Obituary announcement Wedding announcement Change of address Delivery issues Vacation stop Letters to the Editor Submit news Legal Notices Features Agriculture Automotive Books Business Education & Careers Entertainment Food Gardening Green Living Health Home Improvement Kids & Family Lifestyle Money Matters Outdoors Pets Real estate Seniors Spanish Tech Travel Trivia, History & Games Society Public Notices Advertise Contact Us Bird flu outbreak reported in Leake County Posted Thursday, February 9, 2023 4:08 pm A poultry farm in Leake County has been quarantined after poultry from a commercial broiler chicken flock tested positive for highly pathogenic avian influenza earlier this week, leaving roughly 90,000 chickens affected, state agriculture authorities say. A Mississippi Board of Animal Health press release issued Thursday said officials have been notified by the Mississippi Poultry Research and Diagnostic Laboratory of the outbreak, which was confirmed on Tuesday, Feb. 7. Samples from the flock were tested at the MPRDL, part of the National Animal Health Laboratory Network, and confirmed at the APHIS National Veterinary Services Laboratories in Ames, Iowa, officials said. The release did not say where the poultry farm is in Leake County and did not mention if the situation posed any threat to neighboring or nearby farms. The release did say the State Veterinarian, Dr. James Watson, has quarantined the affected premises, and birds on the property have been depopulated to prevent the spread of the disease. According to a database managed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 90,000 birds were affected. Birds from the flock have not entered the food system, the release said. “The MBAH is working closely with federal animal health officials on a joint incident response,” the release said. “The poultry industry was notified and put on high alert to increase biosecurity and surveillance for HPAI. The MBAH is actively working with the industry to increase monitoring of flocks statewide.” According to the release, hobby poultry owners are encouraged to practice good biosecurity and be aware of the signs of avian influenza and report illness and/or death in the MBAH Online Reporting Form. Information will be routed to a state or federal veterinarian in Mississippi for assessment. Dead birds should be double‐bagged and refrigerated for possible testing. Signs include sudden death without clinical signs; lack of energy or appetite; decreased egg production; soft-shelled or misshapen eggs; swelling or purple discoloration of head, eyelids, comb, hocks; nasal discharge; coughing; sneezing; incoordination; and diarrhea. A resource for backyard bird health information is online. This is the second commercial flock to test positive in Mississippi in the past year. The first was detected in November of 2022 in Lawrence County, where 34,000 birds were reported to be affected, according to a database managed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. That case was confirmed on Nov. 4, 2022. and cleared on Dec. 1, officials said. Situation updates and status reports about ongoing avian influenza activities in Mississippi, along with critical disease‐related information, are posted online at www.mbah.ms.gov. Detailed information and resources can be found on the MBAH Avian Influenza page at www.hpai.ms.gov. Other items that may interest you Liquor store seeking shoplifters Tucker man sentenced for enticement of a minor on the … Mississippi 395 to re-open, close again for second … Traffic switch delayed on Highway 19 four-lane CALENDAR Mon 11 Tue 12 Wed 13 Thu 14 Fri 15 Browse full calendar Post an event Special Sections Progress 2021 View special section Other special sections Trending Liquor store seeking shoplifters A Philadelphia liquor store is seeking the identity of two shoplifters. County jail docket • Corbin Apperson, 26, 10150 Rd 442; driving under the influence-1st offense, following too closely, leaving the scene, unattended Man arrested for DUI at checkpoint A Union man was arrested for driving under the influence last week at a safety checkpoint in the Good Hope community off of Road 355. Tucker man sentenced for enticement of a minor on the Choctaw Indian Reservation A Tucker man was sentenced to 30 years in federal prison for enticement of a minor on the Choctaw Indian Reservation. More News Liquor store seeking shoplifters A Philadelphia liquor store is seeking the identity of two shoplifters. County jail docket • Corbin Apperson, 26, 10150 Rd 442; driving under the influence-1st offense, following too closely, leaving the scene, unattended Read more 439 E Beacon Street Philadelphia, MS 39350 1-601-656-4000 © , The Neshoba Democrat News Sports Classifieds Obituaries Editorials Calendar Submit Features Society Public Notices Contact us Powered by Creative Circle Media SolutionsTyson: HPAI hurt turkey operation, chicken paw sales most | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseEggTyson: HPAI hurt turkey operation, chicken paw sales mostThe effects of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) outbreak have had a bigger impact on Tyson Foods than some people might think, Donnie King, the company’s president and CEO said.Roy GraberFebruary 6, 2023Avian influenza-related trade restrictions have hurt Tyson Foods' ability to export chicken paws. (levnat | Bigstock)The effects of the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) outbreak have had a bigger impact on Tyson Foods than some people might think, Donnie King, the company’s president and CEO said.Tyson Foods, which released its quarterly financial results on February 6, hosted an earnings call with analysts that day, followed by another call with the media.Speaking on the media call, King acknowledged that the broiler industry has not been hit by HPAI as hard as the egg and turkey industries, it has had a meaningful impact in its overall chicken operations.“We have had some impacts from an export perspective, and typically for us, it’s the chicken paws. That’s a big deal for us,” said King.Chicken paws are largely exported, although their domestic consumption is rising. But because Tyson operates in many areas that have had an outbreak of HPAI – regardless of whether the virus was confirmed in any of Tyson’s flocks – it is affected by trade restrictions.“We’ve not been able to harvest those or sell those based on all the states in the U.S., except for two, where we have locations have a ban (related to) avian influenza. So that’s had some negative impact in terms of our earnings in Q1. Those are very profitable items for us from an export perspective, and even growing from a domestic perspective.”Turkey operations also hitIt isn’t just Tyson’s broiler operations that have been impacted by HPAI, but also its turkey operations.“We do have a turkey operation that had some impacts as it relates to avian influenza, and they’re dealing with all of the same type of things,” said King.Tyson obtained its turkey operations, including a plant in Storm Lake, Iowa, in 2014 with the acquisition of Hillshire Brands.According to the WATTPoultry.com Top Poultry Companies Database, Tyson Foods slaughtered 383 million pounds of live turkeys in 2021.View our continuing coverage of the global avian influenza situation. RecommendedLatest NewsNational Turkey Federation offering 'Thanksgiving 101' tips and recipesLatest NewsHormel Foods honoredRelated StoriesEggPost Holdings navigating through HPAI challengesEggPennsylvania has first avian influenza case of 2023Egg ProductionAvian flu surges in Ecuador, arrives in BoliviaEggCanada’s bird losses to avian influenza not easy to tallyMore in EggIndustry OrganizationsVirginia Egg Council’s Cecelia Glembocki to retireBrand InsightsVaccination success depends on crew trainingZoetisContinuous evaluation and training are critical to improving pullet vaccination accuracy.Animal WelfareNoble Foods, actor Kelvin Fletcher partner on hen welfareStructures for climbing and tires filled with dust are just a couple of the enrichment materials the egg producer provides its birds.Business and MarketsVital Farms reports over 30% net revenue boost in 2024New offerings, retail distribution gains are given as some of the reasons sales grew in the most recent quarter.Egg ProcessingWhy the egg sector should look more to pet careThere are numerous reasons why egg producers ought to more fully embrace pet nutrition and care.EggUK egg producer Farmlay invests in new grading capacityState-of-the-art egg grader, to be installed in January 2025, responds to growing consumer demand for eggs and more favorable investment climate.EggMichael Foods boosts efficiency at new Minnesota feed millLeading egg producer replaced two aging feed mills with a single, fully automated one, ushering in a new era for Gaylord feed operation.Hen Housing SystemsHow Burnbrae Farms aims to overcome activist challengesBurnbrae Farms CEO Margaret Hudson explains how the company is dealing with an active campaign from an animal activist group.Latest NewsKathy Brodhagen is new CEO at Echo Lake FoodsShe brings to the company years of experience in the egg products industry.EggHappy Egg completes merger with Egg InnovationsThe merger brings together two of the largest U.S. based free-range and pasture-raised egg companies.EuropeMoldovan farm authorized to export eggs to EUGeorge Standard has invested in improvements to production methods and raised product standards to meet the EU standards.EggBurcon launches Puratein for egg replacement applicationsEgg ProductionCooper Farms increases liquid egg productionNew silos will increase storage capacity by 50%.Page 1 of 484Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.The triple burden of flu, RSV and COVID-19 – UK Health Security Agency Skip to main content GOV.UK Blog UK Health Security Agency Organisations: UK Health Security Agency Search blog https://ukhsa.blog.gov.uk/2023/02/07he-triple-burden-of-flu-rsv-and-covid-19/ The triple burden of flu, RSV and COVID-19 Posted by: Victoria Hall and Anna Howells, Posted on: 7 February 2023 - Categories: Coronavirus (COVID-19), flu In November 2022 the SARS-CoV2 Immunity and Reinfection Evaluation study, or SIREN for short, expanded to study flu and Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV). The COVID-19 pandemic provided a masterclass in how to rapidly build understanding of a virus – with new studies rolled out, unprecedented levels of data collected, and scores of dedicated researchers tasked with translating this data into answers about the virus. What is SIREN? SIREN is a nationwide study involving over 44,000 healthcare workers at 135 NHS organisations. The SIREN study was established early in the COVID-19 pandemic, and we have been following participants for over two years now – collecting regular PCR swabs and blood samples from an incredibly dedicated cohort of NHS workers who volunteer their time. Flu, or influenza, is a highly infectious respiratory virus. In the UK the flu season runs from around October to March, with most cases occurring between December and February. Each year flu is a major area of focus for healthcare workers and researchers aiming to protect the UK population. This includes the development and rollout of a vaccine, providing a seasonal information campaign on the virus, and treating those who become really unwell. We saw reduced flu transmission resulting in lower flu levels during the COVID-19 pandemic, thanks to social distancing measures and widespread use of face coverings. The relaxing of these measures means that flu is circulating at higher levels, increasing the burden on healthcare settings. SIREN will also investigate the impact of RSV infection on healthcare workers as part of this expansion. Like the flu, RSV is a highly infectious respiratory virus, and accounts for over half a million GP appointments and over 40,000 hospitalisations a year, largely affecting young children and the elderly. Gaps in our knowledge This has been a difficult winter for the NHS and we know that flu puts a strain on the system each year. Learning more about the burden of flu and other respiratory viruses on both the NHS and wider population is important. We do not currently have accurate estimates of the levels of flu circulating among healthcare workers. One reason for this is that we do not know how many people have flu without experiencing symptoms. In addition, we do not yet understand how flu interacts with COVID-19 and what impact this may have. This is particularly important now that we have moved into a phase in the pandemic where protection measures have reduced, and flu and COVID-19 are circulating at the same time. Knowing more about flu, along with RSV and COVID-19, could help hospitals and policy makers plan effectively for future winters. It is crucial to understand the extent of the burden respiratory viruses place on healthcare workers so that employers can look after the health and wellbeing of staff, which is important in its own right and the foundation of high-quality patient care. How is the SIREN study looking to fill these knowledge gaps Analysis of SIREN samples has helped the UK to evaluate the immune response to COVID-19, provided insight into COVID-19 reinfections and has helped us to build an understanding of the level of protection offered by vaccines. SIREN has helped answer some of the most pressing questions about COVID-19, enabling decision-makers – both national and locally – to control the spread of the disease. SIREN is now turning its attentions to flu and RSV as well as COVID-19. SIREN is uniquely placed to study the impact of additional respiratory viruses – making the most of the samples provided by our fantastic cohort, the data systems we have built and the research collaborations across the UK we have forged, to help answer the most pressing questions. Some of the key questions we hope to answer are: What are the levels of flu in healthcare staff? How many people with flu have no symptoms? How effective is the influenza vaccination against infection? What symptoms do participants experience during respiratory infections? How many sick days do respiratory viruses cause in healthcare workers? We would like to thank the NHS organisations, research teams and lab staff across the UK who have made the SIREN Flu and Winter Pressures sub-study possible, in addition to each and every NHS staff member participating – we could not do this without you. The SIREN Flu and Winter Pressures sub-study is funded by UKHSA with support from Public Health Scotland, Public Health Wales and the Public Health Agency Northern Ireland. We are pleased to share that the sub-study has also recently been awarded grant funding by Health Data Research UK (HDR UK). SIREN is one of 16 research studies chosen to examine how winter pressures faced by the NHS can be eased. You can find more information about the SIREN study here. Making progress on the global mission to develop pandemic-fighting tools within 100 days Climate and health security: Looking ahead to 2023 Sharing and comments Share this page Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Email Related content and links About this blogThe official blog of the UK Health Security Agency, providing expert insight on the organisation's work and all aspects of health security. Sign up and manage updates Email Atom Recent posts How we monitor flu and other respiratory viruses each winter 8 October 2024 Marburg virus disease: what you need to know 8 October 2024 Your guide to who’s eligible for the 2024 flu vaccine 23 September 2024 Useful links All GOV.UK blogs All GOV.UK blog posts GOV.UK All departments Accessibility statement Cookies All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyrightBird flu linked to deaths of more Colorado wildlife - Alamosa Citizen Get the Outdoors in your inbox Hikers, Climbers, Bikers, and anyone who loves to be outside…this is for you! Receive outdoor news, conditions, events, and more right to your inbox twice a month. Sign up, it's free! Support local newsLike what you’ve seen and heard so far? Your support means everything. Drop us a donation or become an AlamosaCitizen.com member today. One-time Monthly Annually One-time $10 $20 $50 Other Donation amount $ Monthly $8.34 $15 $20 Other Donation amount $ Annually $100 $150 $300 Other Donation amount $ Thank you for your support, and for keeping Alamosa Citizen free for all to read! JOIN THE DIGITAL NEWS MOVEMENT Close Support Our Work Sign In Search for: Search News Open dropdown menu Arts & Culture Community News Education Open dropdown menu Educator Highlight Award Election 2024 Outdoors Water Colorado Citizen Valley Stories The Sports Page Podcasts About events Facebook Instagram YouTube Close Skip to content Facebook Instagram YouTube Alamosa Citizen News for Colorado's San Luis Valley News Open dropdown menu Arts & Culture Community News Education Open dropdown menu Educator Highlight Award Election 2024 Outdoors Water Colorado Citizen Valley Stories The Sports Page Podcasts About events Support Our Work Sign In Open Search Search for: Search Menu Sign In Posted inCommunity News Bird flu linked to deaths of more Colorado wildlife by The CitizenFebruary 10, 2023February 10, 2023 Share this:Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) COLORADO Parks and Wildlife has identified several cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in free-ranging wildlife. A black bear from Huerfano County was affected by the disease in October, a skunk from Weld County was found to be positive for the disease in November, and a mountain lion that died in Gunnison County was recently confirmed to have the disease. Get the Outdoors in your inbox Hikers, Climbers, Bikers, and anyone who loves to be outside…this is for you! Receive outdoor news, conditions, events, and more right to your inbox twice a month. Sign up, it's free! Testing was conducted by Colorado State University in Fort Collins and the National Veterinary Services Laboratory in Ames, Iowa.HPAI has already killed thousands of wild birds in the U.S., including in Colorado. This strain of HPAI was first confirmed in wild geese in Northeast Colorado in March 2022.All three confirmed cases showed signs of HPAI before and after death including neurologic symptoms such as seizures, circling, and general signs of illness such as weakness or lack of responsiveness to human presence, and organ damage including encephalitis, hepatitis, and pneumonia. Other similar suspected mammalian cases have been detected in the state, with testing still pending.The Huerfano County black bear was euthanized on Oct. 8, 2022, by a CPW wildlife officer after he saw it having seizures. Its remains were frozen until it could be transported to a health lab for testing. Later in October, a black bear in Alaska tested positive for HPAI. In December, a brown bear cub on Kodiak Island in Alaska also tested positive for HPAI. “The decision to humanely euthanize the animal by our wildlife officer was made following the abnormal behavior and knowledge that numerous infectious diseases cause neurological symptoms,” said CPW Area Wildlife Manager Mike Brown. “Extremely ill animals have difficulty moving and often act abnormally. While clinical signs of numerous diseases may be observed, diagnostic laboratory testing and necropsy services help determine the actual cause of death.”The Gunnison County mountain lion was found dead just outside of Gunnison city limits on Jan. 15, 2023, in an area where mountain lion activity is commonplace. The mountain lion had necrosis in the liver and bronchointerstitial pneumonia, which have been seen in domestic cats with HPAI, so this also warranted HPAI testing. “Similar to many local species, mountain lions move through our communities on a regular basis as they travel between seasonal ranges throughout the year,” said CPW Area Wildlife Manager Brandon Diamond. “It was only a matter of time before the first HPAI case was confirmed in Gunnison County based on known cases in adjacent counties. While this is an interesting case study with the lion, it’s important to point out that HPAI has been documented previously in a variety of mammals from across the country. In Gunnison County, CPW routinely investigates reports of sick and injured wildlife and is always interested in hearing from the public if they encounter something that doesn’t look quite right.”Mammalian wildlife species affected with the current strain of avian flu in the U.S. include skunks, foxes, black bears, bobcats, coyotes, and raccoons, among several others. It has also been detected in marine mammals. These mammals likely become infected by feeding on wild birds that are sick or have died of HPAI. However, not every mammal that consumes a sick bird will develop HPAI. These recent Colorado cases add to a growing list of affected wildlife species. Despite the variety of mammalian species susceptible to HPAI, the numbers of mammal-related cases are low. The majority of cases confirmed during this HPAI outbreak are in wild and domestic birds. The most commonly affected wild birds in Colorado have been geese and the raptors and scavenging birds that eat goose carcasses. CPW continues to stress the importance of keeping your distance from wildlife – specifically, don’t handle sick or dead birds. Although rare, some HPAI strains can infect humans. Links to recommendations for hunters and risks to pets are included below. The main protection for the public is to avoid handling sick or dead birds and keep your distance from wildlife. See the CDC website for more information on how to take protective actions.This map lists confirmed wildlife mammalian cases that have tested positive for HPAI to date.ResourcesInformation on HPAI in Colorado:https://cpw.state.co.us/learn/Pages/Avian-Influenza.aspxhttps://ag.colorado.gov/animalseportable-diseases/avian-influenzaInformation on HPAI in pets:https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/avian-in-other-animals.htmInformation on hunting and HPAI:https://www.aphis.usda.gov/publications/animal_health/fsc_hpai_hunters.pdfInformation on HPAI in wild birds in the United States:https://www.usgs.gov/centerswhc/science/distribution-highly-pathogenic-avian-influenza-north-america-20212022Information on HPAI and human health:https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/avian-in-humans.htmhttps://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/avian-flu-summary.htmhttps://www.usgs.gov/centerswhc/science/distribution-highly-pathogenic-avian-influenza-north-america-20212022 Support local newsWe rely on support from readers like you. One-time Monthly Annually One-time $10 $20 $100 Other Donation amount $ Monthly $8.34 $15 $30 Other Donation amount $ Annually $100 $150 $200 Other Donation amount $ Thanks for supporting local news and for keeping Alamosa Citizen free for all to read. Join the digital news movement! Related Tagged: Colorado Parks and Wildlife, Colorado State University, Gunnison County, Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, Huerfano County, San Luis Valley Latest News Valley gets representation in state house and senate leadership by Owen Woods November 11, 2024November 11, 2024 Sierra Grande six-man team remains undefeated in playoffs by Alamosa Citizen November 11, 2024November 11, 2024 A bright day to honor veterans by Owen Woods November 11, 2024November 11, 2024 ‘Christmastown: A Holiday Noir’ takes the stage by The Citizen November 11, 2024November 11, 2024 Facebook Instagram YouTube © 2024 Alamosa Citizen Powered by Newspack Privacy Policy Facebook Instagram YouTube I don't have an account I already have an account Sign In We've recently sent you an authentication link. Please, check your inbox! Sign in with a password below, or sign in using your email. Get a code sent to your email to sign in, or sign in using a password. Enter the code you received via email to sign in, or sign in using a password. Subscribe to our newsletters: The Weekend Citizen A free newsletter sent every weekend. The Outdoor Citizen A free Outdoor Report delivered to inboxes twice a month. Alamosa Citizen Sign in Sign in with your email Lost your password? Sign in Try a different email Send another code Send authorization code Sign in with a password Sign up OR Sign in with Google Privacy Policy CloseIn Ontario, worries of an even deadlier pandemic start with chickens | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore In Ontario, worries of an even deadlier pandemic start with chickens | CBC News LoadedLondonIn Ontario, worries of an even deadlier pandemic start with chickensThe Ontario government and the poultry industry are stressing biosecurity at their first meeting since the COVID-19 pandemic began almost three years ago, with the hope that farmers' actions today might stop an even deadlier pandemic before it starts.The talk among poultry farmers isn't 'if' H5N1 arrives in Ontario this spring, but 'when' Colin Butler · CBC News · Posted: Feb 09, 2023 5:00 AM EST | Last Updated: February 9, 2023A man walks by a display at the National Poultry Show in London, Ont. Traditionally held in April, organizers moved the event to February because avian flu is posing an increasing threat to domestic flocks and human health. (Colin Butler/CBC News)Social SharingThe Ontario government and the province's poultry industry are putting renewed focus on biosecurity at their first meeting in the three years since the COVID-19 pandemic began, with the hope farmers' actions today might stop an even deadlier pandemic before it begins. Until this year, the National Poultry Show in London, Ont., was traditionally held in April. But as infections and losses among domestic flocks continue to add up from the highly pathogenic avian flu, or H5N1, the event was moved to early February to get the message out before wild birds start their spring migration. Bird flu keeps spreading beyond birds. Scientists worry it signals a growing threat to humans, tooWith farms still under quarantine in B.C.'s Fraser Valley and outbreaks in Quebec last summer, the talk among poultry farmers in London, at the industry's largest gathering in Canada, isn't about "if" the virus arrives, but "when." At this year's show, authorities aren't taking any chances on their messaging to farmers and the important role they play in preventing the spread of H5N1 — especially after a Spanish mink farm was decimated by the virus in what might be the first documented case of mammal-to-mammal transmission of the illness.H5N1 could make COVID-19 look mild"The fact that we're seeing that mammal-to-mammal infection is a concern — we're mammals," said Al Dam, a poultry specialist with the Ontario Ministry of Agriculture Food and Rural Affairs (OMAFRA).A fake chicken is used to demonstrate farm equipment at the National Poultry Show on Wednesday. Live poultry can no longer be used in shows because of fears that the H5N1 virus might spread to other farms or humans. (Colin Butler/CBC News)It's why OMAFRA now discourages live poultry shows and livestock auctions, while encouraging all poultry and swine workers to get the flu shot — to prevent human flu strains from mixing with their avian or porcine counterparts and a potential zoonotic leap along with it. If avian flu ever made the leap to humans, the result could make the COVID-19 pandemic look mild.Since 2003, there have been 240 human cases of the virus in four Pacific region countries. Of these, 135 were fatal, giving the virus a case fatality rate of 56 per cent, according to the World Health Organization. The most recent human case was detected in China last fall. The patient died in less than a month. "We have to push a hard message," Dam said. "People don't realize, it's not just their little fish bowl."Even a small misstep, such as forgetting to change boots or tools between barns, can result in life-changing consequences on the farm. A single case of avian flu detected on a chicken, turkey or duck farm would result in Canadian Food Inspection Agency officials imposing a 10-kilometre quarantine, before euthanizing every single animal. Hospital cleaner for use on the farmThat fact isn't lost on farmers like Brock Wiebe, who works on his family's chicken farm in St. Marys, Ont., where they depend on a flock of 14,000 birds to make a living. Mark Bevan, president of EthoGuard, shows off his company's latest offering to the agriculture industry. Farmers can use this virtual reality headset to get biosecurity training from the company, using its marquis disinfectant product, Prevail. (Colin Butler/CBC News)"We're anxious but we're taking every precaution we can because it can wipe out your whole flock," Wiebe said. Biosecurity has become such big business in agriculture that it's prompted entrepreneurs such as Mark Bevan to make a foray from health care to agriculture. The Fraser Valley has 80% of B.C.'s poultry farms. Now avian flu is threatening almost an entire industryFarmers on alert as avian flu found on 4th southern Ontario farmBevan is president of EthoGuard, a company that's found a flourishing business selling disinfectant, personal protective equipment, biosecurity training for farmers — even cleaning up after an avian flu outbreak. "Biosecurity has an increasing importance," Bevan said. "The reality that we're in right now with avian influenza, it's even more important to reduce your risk of getting it on your farm."Influenza, unfortunately, is becoming a bit of a norm now."The company's marquis product is Prevail, a stabilized hydrogen peroxide product that was first developed for hospitals during the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) crisis. As avian flu and swine fever began to increasingly threaten farms a decade ago, Bevan said he and his business partners saw an opportunity they couldn't pass up."The technology is called accelerated hydrogen peroxide. It's a Canadian invention actually," he said. "It's seen as the most effective choice. It's a very quick contact time for killing pathogens, but the real magic is it's actually a cleaner as well." Bevan said since introducing the product in agriculture, business has grown, but Prevail is still a minor player. He hopes to one day replicate the success the chemical has seen in hospitals, where it's as indispensable as rubber gloves.ABOUT THE AUTHORColin ButlerReporterColin Butler covers the environment, real estate, justice as well as urban and rural affairs for CBC News in London, Ont. He is a veteran journalist with 20 years' experience in print, radio and television in seven Canadian cities. You can email him at colin.butler@cbc.ca.More by Colin Butler:CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorRelated Stories Bird flu keeps spreading beyond birds. Scientists worry it signals a growing threat to humans, too Poultry producers on edge as avian flu sweeps through Alberta farms The Fraser Valley has 80% of B.C.'s poultry farms. Now avian flu is threatening almost an entire industry Farmers on alert as avian flu found on 4th southern Ontario farmFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canowMore than 500 sea lions and 55,000 birds die from bird flu in Peru | EuronewsGo to navigationGo to main contentGo to searchGo to footer English EnglishFrançaisDeutschItalianoEspañolPortuguêsPусскийTürkçeΕλληνικάMagyarفارسیالعربيةShqipRomânăქართულიбългарскиSrpskiNewsletterNewslettersEventsEventsPodcastsSearchLoaderLatestTrendingUS presidential election 2024COP29Donald TrumpGermanyCinemaArtificial intelligenceLatest stories Now playing Next Germany Carnival season starts with festivals in Cologne and Mainz Now playing Next Spain Rubbish build up after Spanish floods leads to rats and health issues Now playing Next Serbia Thousands march in Serbian capital demanding prime minister resigns Now playing Next Europe News New riots break out in Amsterdam as tensions remain high EuropeCategoriesEurope NewsEurope SeriesProgrammesBrussels, My Love?Europeans' StoriesEuroVerifyEurope in MotionEU DecodedState Of The UnionSmart RegionsThe Europe ConversationFeaturedRadio SchumanThis is Radio Schuman, your new go-to podcast to spice up your weekday mornings with relevant news, insights, and behind-the-scenes from Brussels and beyond.WorldCategoriesWorldSportProgrammesSpotlightNo CommentEuronews WitnessQatar 365World NewsEuronews DebatesTop News Stories TodayFeaturedNo CommentNo agenda, no argument, no bias, No Comment. Get the story without commentary.EU PolicyBusinessCategoriesBusinessEconomyMarketsProgrammesBusiness PlanetFocusGlobal JapanMy Wildest PredictionReal EconomyStart Me UpThe DialogueTargetThe Big QuestionThe ExchangeFeaturedMy Wildest PredictionDare to imagine the future with business and tech visionariesThe Big QuestionDeep dive conversations with business leadersEuroviewsNextCategoriesTech NewsMoneySpaceWorkMobilityHomeProgrammesDub.AIEuronews Tech TalksHacker HunterRethink Sci-TechFeaturedEuronews Tech TalksEuronews Tech Talks goes beyond discussions to explore the impact of new technologies on our lives. With explanations, engaging Q&As, and lively conversations, the podcast provides valuable insights into the intersection of technology and society.GreenCategoriesGreen NewsClimateNatureLivingEco-InnovationProgrammesClimate NowOceanOcean CallsThe Road To GreenWater MattersFeaturedWater MattersEurope's water is under increasing pressure. Pollution, droughts, floods are taking their toll on our drinking water, lakes, rivers and coastlines. Join us on a journey around Europe to see why protecting ecosystems matters, how our wastewater can be better managed, and to discover some of the best water solutions. Video reports, an animated explainer series and live debate - find out why Water Matters, from Euronews.Climate NowWe give you the latest climate facts from the world’s leading source, analyse the trends and explain how our planet is changing. We meet the experts on the front line of climate change who explore new strategies to mitigate and adapt.HealthCategoriesHealth newsHealthcareNutritionWellbeingProgrammesSmart HealthCultureCategoriesCulture newsLifestyleDesignArtFood and DrinkMusicCinemaProgrammesCreatorsCrossing CulturesCry Like A BoyCultInspire SaudiMeet The LocalsMelting Pot CultureMusicaScenesThe Kitchen The Star IngredientTravelCategoriesTravel NewsDestinationsExperiencesStaysPeopleProgrammesAdventuresConscious TravelExploreGolf Travel TalesNotes From The UsaSoul Of The SouthTasteWomen Beyond BordersVideosMoreSpecial coverageThe New UzbekistanAzerbaijan DiaryDiscover AlgeriaDiscover TürkiyeDiscover SharjahExplore AzerbaijanGolf Travel TalesFrom QatarPartner contentPowering ProgressBetter ConnectedClassic Piano CompetitionDigital Garden City NationExperience BrazilGalaxy Brain InvestorRon BarcelóSecuring the futureSparkle Turkmenistan - Our storyWine of MoldovaServicesWeatherJob offers from AmplyBulletinMessaging appsWidgets & ServicesFind UsLog InMy Account Live Close menu sidebar English EnglishFrançaisDeutschItalianoEspañolPortuguêsPусскийTürkçeΕλληνικάMagyarفارسیالعربيةShqipRomânăქართულიбългарскиSrpskiLatestTrendingUS presidential election 2024COP29Donald TrumpGermanyCinemaArtificial intelligenceLatest stories Now playing Next Germany Carnival season starts with festivals in Cologne and Mainz Now playing Next Spain Rubbish build up after Spanish floods leads to rats and health issues Now playing Next Serbia Thousands march in Serbian capital demanding prime minister resigns Now playing Next Europe News New riots break out in Amsterdam as tensions remain high EuropeCategoriesEurope NewsEurope SeriesProgrammesBrussels, My Love?Europeans' StoriesEuroVerifyEurope in MotionEU DecodedState Of The UnionSmart RegionsThe Europe ConversationFeaturedRadio SchumanThis is Radio Schuman, your new go-to podcast to spice up your weekday mornings with relevant news, insights, and behind-the-scenes from Brussels and beyond.WorldCategoriesWorldSportProgrammesSpotlightNo CommentEuronews WitnessQatar 365World NewsEuronews DebatesTop News Stories TodayFeaturedNo CommentNo agenda, no argument, no bias, No Comment. Get the story without commentary.EU PolicyBusinessCategoriesBusinessEconomyMarketsProgrammesBusiness PlanetFocusGlobal JapanMy Wildest PredictionReal EconomyStart Me UpThe DialogueTargetThe Big QuestionThe ExchangeFeaturedMy Wildest PredictionDare to imagine the future with business and tech visionariesThe Big QuestionDeep dive conversations with business leadersEuroviewsNextCategoriesTech NewsMoneySpaceWorkMobilityHomeProgrammesDub.AIEuronews Tech TalksHacker HunterRethink Sci-TechFeaturedEuronews Tech TalksEuronews Tech Talks goes beyond discussions to explore the impact of new technologies on our lives. With explanations, engaging Q&As, and lively conversations, the podcast provides valuable insights into the intersection of technology and society.GreenCategoriesGreen NewsClimateNatureLivingEco-InnovationProgrammesClimate NowOceanOcean CallsThe Road To GreenWater MattersFeaturedWater MattersEurope's water is under increasing pressure. Pollution, droughts, floods are taking their toll on our drinking water, lakes, rivers and coastlines. Join us on a journey around Europe to see why protecting ecosystems matters, how our wastewater can be better managed, and to discover some of the best water solutions. Video reports, an animated explainer series and live debate - find out why Water Matters, from Euronews.Climate NowWe give you the latest climate facts from the world’s leading source, analyse the trends and explain how our planet is changing. We meet the experts on the front line of climate change who explore new strategies to mitigate and adapt.HealthCategoriesHealth newsHealthcareNutritionWellbeingProgrammesSmart HealthCultureCategoriesCulture newsLifestyleDesignArtFood and DrinkMusicCinemaProgrammesCreatorsCrossing CulturesCry Like A BoyCultInspire SaudiMeet The LocalsMelting Pot CultureMusicaScenesThe Kitchen The Star IngredientTravelCategoriesTravel NewsDestinationsExperiencesStaysPeopleProgrammesAdventuresConscious TravelExploreGolf Travel TalesNotes From The UsaSoul Of The SouthTasteWomen Beyond BordersVideosMoreSpecial coverageThe New UzbekistanAzerbaijan DiaryDiscover AlgeriaDiscover TürkiyeDiscover SharjahExplore AzerbaijanGolf Travel TalesFrom QatarPartner contentPowering ProgressBetter ConnectedClassic Piano CompetitionDigital Garden City NationExperience BrazilGalaxy Brain InvestorRon BarcelóSecuring the futureSparkle Turkmenistan - Our storyWine of MoldovaServicesWeatherJob offers from AmplyBulletinMessaging appsWidgets & ServicesNewsletterNewslettersEventsEventsPodcastsSearchLoaderFind UsADVERTISEMENT Green Green News More than 500 sea lions and 55,000 birds die from bird flu in Peru This handout picture released by the Peruvian National Wildlife Areas Service (SERNANP) shows scientists at the Paracas National Reserve inspecting a dead sea lion. - Copyright SERNANP / AFP Copyright SERNANP / AFP By Rosie Frost with AFP Published on 10/02/2023 - 12:17 GMT+1•Updated 12:18Share this articleCommentsShare this articleFacebookTwitterFlipboardSendRedditMessengerLinkedinVKCopy/paste the article video embed link below:Copied Local authorities have warned people and their pets to avoid contact with the animals on the beach. ADVERTISEMENTHundreds of sea lions have died of bird flu in Peru in recent weeks, authorities say, urging people to stay away from the beaches.It is thought that migratory birds from the US were responsible for transmitting the disease.55,000 dead birds including pelicans and penguins have been discovered across eight protected coastal areas, the Sernanp natural area protection agency said.Wildlife rangers in the region found that the bird flu which killed them had also claimed the lives of 585 sea lions in seven different protected marine areas. Lab tests confirmed the presence of the virus in these animals, prompting authorities to announce a “biological vigilance protocol”.Peru's National Forest and Wildlife Service (SERFOR) has urged people and their pets to avoid contact with sea lions and seabirds on the beach.RelatedCould fur farming be banned in the EU? Here's which countries still support the industryWorld’s oldest dog is celebrating his birthday with a 'very traditional' Portuguese partyIn November, Peru declared a 180-day health alert after finding three cases of highly contagious bird flu in pelicans.Then, in December, 37,000 birds on a chicken farm were culled after a previous outbreak affected wildlife. Killing the birds is a part of standard protocol to prevent the spread of avian influenza.Scientists at the Paracas National Reserve are deploying a monitoring and surveillance protocol for cases of bird flu.SERNANP / AFPIs bird flu a risk to humans?It is rare that the H5N1 bird flu virus jumps over to mammals and even rarer that humans catch it. But recently it has been found in foxes and otters in Britain, a cat in France and grizzly bears in Montana, US.All of the mammals that caught the virus are thought to have eaten infected birds.Since late 2021, Europe has been gripped by the worst-ever outbreak of the virus. North and South America have seen severe outbreaks too.RelatedWildlife Photographer of the Year: ‘Dream’ shot of elusive snow leopard wins people’s choice awardBeavers are helping to rewild London: Where and how to see Europe’s largest rodentsWorld Health Organisation director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus warned on Wednesday that these cases of H5N1 in mammals must be “closely monitored”.He said that the risk to humans was currently low but “we cannot assume that that will remain the case and we must prepare for any change in the status quo.”Ghebreyesus cautioned people against touching sick or dead animals and encouraged those who find them to report them to local authorities.Watch the video above to learn more about Peru’s bird flu outbreak.Video editor • Joanna AdhemGo to accessibility shortcutsShare this articleComments You might also like Now playing Next No Comment Sea Lions' Spectacular Return Brings Joy to San Francisco's pier 39 Now playing Next World News Bird flu: how much of a risk is there for humans? Now playing Next Green News World is already becoming dangerously overheated, warns WMO wildlife beach Animals Disease Ocean Bird flu ADVERTISEMENTTop stories Now playing Next Grant, loan or investment: Are strings attached to climate finance? Now playing Next The EU’s border-building spree is hurting wildlife, experts warn Now playing Next Is it time we retire the carbon footprint concept? Now playing Next World is already becoming dangerously overheated, warns WMO Now playing Next Are jellyfish taking over the ocean? In partnership with the European CommissionADVERTISEMENTMost read COP29: The state of the climate in eight charts COP29: What happened on day one of the UN climate conference? Why have so many world leaders dropped out of COP29 climate talks? How Trump’s election win is looming over negotiations at COP29 in Baku Paris goes car-free in attempt to curb air pollution ADVERTISEMENTLoaderSearchBrowse today's tagsUS presidential election 2024COP29Donald TrumpGermanyCinemaArtificial intelligenceHealthItalyclimate changeAzerbaijanIsrael-Hezbollah conflictAIThemesEuropeWorldBusinessEU PolicyGreenNextHealthTravelCultureVideosProgrammesServicesLiveBulletinWeatherLatestFollow usAppsMessaging appsWidgets & ServicesJob offers from AmplyAfricanewsMoreAbout EuronewsCommercial ServicesTerms and ConditionsCookie PolicyPrivacy PolicyContactPress officeWork at EuronewsModify my cookies choicesFollow usNewslettersCopyright © euronews 2024Stomach Flu Cases Spiking in the Midwest, CDC Data Shows. Here’s What You Should Know – NBC Chicago Skip to content Main Navigation Search Search for: Local Weather Video Investigations Entertainment Sports NBC 5 Responds Newsletters Watch News 24/7 Trending 24/7 Streaming News Chicago Sports 2024 Election Must-See Videos Chicago Today Holiday Guide Expand Health & Science Stomach Flu Cases Spiking in the Midwest, CDC Data Shows. Here's What You Should Know While most norovirus cases typically occur between November and April in a given year, cases in the Midwest have spiked dramatically since mid-January, according to the latest metrics Published February 10, 2023 • Updated on February 10, 2023 at 3:44 pm Norovirus cases are climbing across the U.S., particularly in the Midwest, where cases are already above levels seen in 2022, data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows. While most norovirus cases typically occur between November and April in a given year, cases in the Midwest have spiked dramatically since mid-January, according to the latest metrics. 📺 24/7 Chicago news stream: Watch NBC 5 free wherever you are Data from the CDC showed the rate of positive tests for norovirus averaged over three weeks had climbed from 11.5% on Jan. 14 to 19.5% on Feb. 4. Around the same time last year, the same metric was averaging 10.2%. The spike in cases mirrors a national trend, where cases have also soared over the last few weeks. As of Saturday, however, the Midwest's number appeared to be the highest in the country. Norovirus, often referred to as the stomach flu, though it is not related to influenza, "is a very contagious virus that causes vomiting and diarrhea" in people of all ages, the CDC states. Local Astronomy 28 mins ago November supermoon will rise this week, and here's why it's so special Delphi Murders 45 mins ago Sentencing set after Richard Allen found guilty in Delphi murders But even with numbers rising, the CDC says levels aren't out of the expected range. "Norovirus outbreaks and reported cases from both state health departments and clinical laboratories are increasing but remain within the expected range for this time of year," Kate Grusich, a CDC spokesperson, told NBC News. Feeling out of the loop? We'll catch you up on the Chicago news you need to know. Sign up for the weekly Chicago Catch-Up newsletter. Grusich noted that "prevention measures implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic" may have led to lower numbers last year. Noroviruses are the leading cause of foodborne illness in the U.S., the agency notes, adding that "in years when there is a new strain of the virus, there can be 50% more norovirus illness." On average, noroviruses lead to roughly 900 deaths each year in the U.S., with another 109,000 hospitalizations and between 19 and 21 million illnesses reported. So what can you do as cases rise? Here's what you should know: What are the symptoms of norovirus? According to Illinois' health department, "many of the noroviruses cause similar symptoms." Onset usually happens within 24 to 48 hours after exposure. Those symptoms include: Nausea Vomiting Diarrhea Abdominal pain Body aches Headache Tiredness Low-grade fever "Symptoms typically last 24 hours to 60 hours and subside on their own" the Illinois Department of Public Health reports. "There are no known long-term effects after recovery from this infection." How does it spread? IDPH notes that only humans can transmit norovirus as "these viruses do not multiply outside the human body." They can spread through a lack of hand washing and food handling, contaminated drinking water, shellfish and possibly through objects "contaminated with fecal material." "You can get norovirus by accidentally getting tiny particles of feces (poop) or vomit from an infected person in your mouth," the CDC reports. When are people with norovirus most contagious? The CDC reports people with norovirus are most contagious while experiencing symptoms, particularly vomiting, and during the first few days after recovery. But, the agency notes that some studies have shown people can still spread the virus for two weeks or more after symptoms subside. Is there treatment for norovirus? There is no specific treatment or medication available for people with norovirus, but experts say those who experience vomiting or diarrhea should drink plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration. How can I prevent norovirus? Experts say practicing good hygiene can be key to preventing noroviruses. Illinois health officials suggest the following: Frequently wash your hands, especially after toileting or changing diapers and before eating or preparing food. Carefully wash fruits and vegetables, and steam oysters before eating them. Thoroughly clean and disinfect contaminated surfaces immediately after an episode of diarrhea or vomiting by using a bleach-based household cleaner. If using liquid household bleach prepared daily, one part bleach to nine parts water (1:10 dilution) is recommended. Immediately remove and wash clothing or linens that may be contaminated with feces or vomitus (use hot water and soap). Flush or discard any vomitus and/or stool in the toilet and make sure that the surrounding area is kept clean. Persons who are infected with norovirus should refrain from food preparation while they have symptoms and for three days after they recover from their illness. This article tagged under: Health & Science on now 7:30PM: NBC 5 News Trending Stories Mount Prospect Body found in Busse Woods identified as missing 23-year-old woman Decision 2024 When will we know who controls the House? Here are the races left to be called Decision 2024 Who was the presidential election's popular vote winner? Here's where the vote count stands news Mattel pulls thousands of ‘Wicked' dolls off shelves after printing adult web address on packaging North Riverside Suburban Chicago mall has new look after $9M in renovations Weather Forecast Facebook Instagram TikTok About NBC Chicago Telemundo Chicago Our News Standards Submit Tips for Investigations Newsletters Connect With Us NBC Sports Chicago Xfinity: Internet, TV, streaming, more WMAQ Public Inspection File WMAQ Accessibility WMAQ Employment Information Send Feedback FCC Applications Terms of Service Your Privacy Choices Privacy Policy Advertise with us CA Notice Ad Choices Copyright © 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLC. All rights reserved Close Menu Search for: Local Weather Weather Alerts School Closings NBC Sports Chicago Investigations NBC 5 Responds Submit a tip Entertainment Traffic Sports Chicago Baseball Chicago Bears Chicago Blackhawks Health U.S. & World Making A Difference Chicago Today About NBC Chicago Our News Standards Submit a Consumer Complaint Submit Photos and Video Contests Newsletters TV Schedule Our Apps Cozi TV Follow Us Facebook Instagram TikTok Contact UsStudy demonstrates antiviral effects of vinegar against SARS-CoV-2 Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Study demonstrates antiviral effects of vinegar against SARS-CoV-2 Download PDF Copy By Dr. Sanchari Sinha Dutta, Ph.D.Reviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Feb 9 2023 A study published in the journal PLOS ONE demonstrates the effectiveness of acetic acid, the main component of vinegar, in inactivating severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Study: Effect of acetic acid inactivation of SARS-CoV-2. Image Credit: New Africa / Shutterstock Background SARS-CoV-2, the causative pathogen of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, is a zoonotic RNA virus that causes a wide variety of symptoms in humans, ranging from mild flu-like symptoms to fatal pneumonia and multiorgan failure. The virus primarily infects the upper respiratory tract epithelium and gradually spreads to the lower respiratory tract to induce severe lung damage. Systemic transmission of the virus to other organs has also been documented. The spike glycoprotein on the viral envelope binds to the human cell membrane receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) to initiate the viral entry process. Regarding mode of transmission, the virus has been found to spread directly from infected persons to nearby contacts via large respiratory droplets and small aerosols. In addition, indirect viral transmission through contaminated surfaces has also been reported. In the current study, scientists have examined the effectiveness of acetic acid in inactivating SARS-CoV-2 and preventing host cell entry. Acetic acid is a major active component of vinegar, which is used widely to remove bacteria from fresh products. The component is also known to have antiviral activities. For example, studies have shown that acetic acid disaggregates surface glycoproteins of influenza viruses, destroys viral envelop, and prevents viral transmission. Study design The study examined the anti-SARS-CoV-2 activities of white distilled vinegar, which contains 6% acetic acid. The virus neutralization by acetic acid was tested by a modified version of the Median Tissue Culture Infectious Dose (TCID50) assay. Morphological analysis of acetic acid-treated SARS-CoV-2 was performed by transmission electron microscopy. The ability of acetic acid to block the interaction between the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor binding domain (RBD) and human ACE2 was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 The findings of TCID50 assay revealed that the exposure to 6% acetic acid for 15 minutes caused complete long-term inhibition of viral replication. Related StoriesCould vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionThe long-term cardiac impact of COVID-19Leritrelvir shows high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 protease mutationsIn general, coronaviruses are round-shaped structures with a diameter of approximately 80 nm. The transmission electron microscopic analysis of untreated SARS-CoV-2 revealed morphologically intact structures similar to coronaviruses belonging to the Coronaviridae family. The treatment of SARS-CoV-2 with 6% acetic acid caused significant alterations in viral morphology, including misshapen structures, reduced number of viral particles, and disorganized virion structure. Effect of vinegar on SARS-CoV-2 viral particles by transmission electron microscope (TEM). (A-B) Representative TEM images. (A) The untreated cells, water (- vinegar) SARS-CoV-2 viral particles shows morphodiagnostic features of family Coronaviridae with morphologically intact structure whereas (B) Cells treated with 6% acetic acid (+ vinegar) SARS-CoV-2 viral particles showing presence of abnormal viral morphodiagnostic with misshapen structure with fewer viral particles, and disorganized virion structure. Scale bar = A-B 100nm. Insets are shown from additional images of the same sample. Spike RBD – ACE2 interaction The findings of ELISA revealed that the treatment with 6% acetic acid significantly inhibited the binding of SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD with human ACE2 at all tested timepoints (5, 10, 30, and 60 minutes). The highest inhibition by 6% acetic acid was observed at a 30-minute timepoint. Study significance The study demonstrates the virucidal activities of acetic acid against SARS-CoV-2. Based on the study findings, acetic acid at 6% concentration is capable of inactivating SARS-CoV-2 and blocking the interaction between viral spike RBD and human ACE2. White distilled vinegar commonly used in households contains 6% acetic acid. Thus, the findings support using vinegar as a disinfectant to eliminate SARS-CoV-2 from frequently-touched surfaces and subsequently prevent indirect virus transmission. Journal reference: Amruta N. 2023. Effect of acetic acid inactivation of SARS-CoV-2. PLOS ONE. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0276578 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: ACE2, Angiotensin, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2, Assay, B Cell, Bacteria, Cell, Cell Membrane, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Disinfectant, Electron, Electron Microscopy, ELISA, Enzyme, Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA), Flu, Glycoprotein, Influenza, Membrane, Microscopy, Morphology, Pandemic, Pathogen, Pneumonia, Receptor, Respiratory, RNA, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Tissue Culture, Virus Comments (1) Written byDr. Sanchari Sinha DuttaDr. Sanchari Sinha Dutta is a science communicator who believes in spreading the power of science in every corner of the world. She has a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) degree and a Master's of Science (M.Sc.) in biology and human physiology. Following her Master's degree, Sanchari went on to study a Ph.D. in human physiology. She has authored more than 10 original research articles, all of which have been published in world renowned international journals. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APADutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. (2024, May 07). Study demonstrates antiviral effects of vinegar against SARS-CoV-2. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20230209/Study-demonstrates-antiviral-effects-of-vinegar-against-SARS-CoV-2.aspx.MLADutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. "Study demonstrates antiviral effects of vinegar against SARS-CoV-2". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20230209/Study-demonstrates-antiviral-effects-of-vinegar-against-SARS-CoV-2.aspx>.ChicagoDutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. "Study demonstrates antiviral effects of vinegar against SARS-CoV-2". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20230209/Study-demonstrates-antiviral-effects-of-vinegar-against-SARS-CoV-2.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardDutta, Sanchari Sinha Dutta. 2024. Study demonstrates antiviral effects of vinegar against SARS-CoV-2. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20230209/Study-demonstrates-antiviral-effects-of-vinegar-against-SARS-CoV-2.aspx. Suggested Reading New study reveals long-term brainstem damage in COVID-19 survivors using advanced MRI scansSARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearanceCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Genetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patientsOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Public trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USResearch links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patients Comments Plos 1 impact factor Gabriel Bourke says: February 12, 2023 at 6:44 PM This article is a joke and a slap in the face of all those that lost family 👪 members PLOS ONE is the journal of choice for authors who want their research to be available to all, immediately and without restriction.Impact factor 3 😁 0 0 Reply The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersHow calcium and magnesium deficiencies impact cognitive health Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsNew discovery reveals how mutant RAS genes drive tumor growthTargeted degradation of Pin1 shows promise for pancreatic cancer treatmentFrailty increases a person's risk of dementia, study findsDiscrimination may drive postpartum weight retention in Black womenResearchers develop new antibody with potential to treat several types of cancer Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Respiratory Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Gastroenterology (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Mild COVID-19 disrupts brain connectivity and reduces memory function in adolescents and young adultsShould You Get the Flu Shot During Pregnancy? Sign UpSign Out Getting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearToddlerFamilyBaby NamesRegistry BuilderBaby ProductsCommunity Groups News TopicsFertilityOvulationPreparing for PregnancyPreconception HealthInfertilitySee All Getting Pregnant TopicsRecommended ReadingWhat is Implantation Bleeding and When Does It Occur?Implantation bleeding can mimic period bleeding, but it could also mean that you're pregnant. Here’s how to tell whether spotting or light bleeding is a sign of pregnancy, your period or something else.Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of OvulationSigns of ovulation can include increased basal body temperature, mild cramps and more. Here's what to expect — and how to use this information to increase your chances of getting pregnant.Does a Faint Line on a Pregnancy Test Mean You're Pregnant?Taking a home pregnancy test is always a nail-biter. How accurate the results are depend a lot on when you take it and what the lines in the window reveal.When Does Implantation Occur?Learn more about the possible signs and symptoms of implantation during pregnancy, plus when and why it happens.How to Have a Boy or a GirlOn team blue or pink? Find out if these ways to choose baby's sex really work and whether it's a good idea to try them.ToolsOvulation CalculatorIVF Due Date CalculatorTopicsPregnancy Week-by-WeekPregnancy SymptomsLabor & DeliveryPreparing for BabyFetal DevelopmentScreenings & TestsBaby’s Zodiac SignBaby ShowersPregnancy ComplicationsSee All Pregnancy TopicsRecommended ReadingEarly Signs of PregnancyIf you’re trying to get pregnant, here’s a timeline of the early signs of pregnancy to look for, including tender breasts, fatigue, nausea and bloating.Managing Morning Sickness and Nausea During PregnancyHere are the symptoms and causes of morning sickness, plus what you can do to relieve it.Signs of LaborNot sure how to know if you're in labor? Look for these clues that it's almost show time!Changes or Decreases in Fetal MovementHave your baby's movements changed? Find out what's normal and when to call the doctor.Signs You Are Having a Boy or GirlHere are some clues to whether you're having a boy or a girl that have research behind them.Braxton Hicks Contractions and False LaborHow to tell the difference between these false labor signs and the real deal.ToolsPregnancy Due Date CalculatorConception Date CalculatorPregnancy Weight Gain CalculatorChinese Gender PredictorTopicsBaby Month-by-MonthPostpartum RecoveryNewbornsMilestonesBreastfeedingBottle-FeedingIntroducing SolidsBaby SleepVaccinesSleep SchedulesFeeding SchedulesSee All First Year TopicsRecommended ReadingWhen Do Baby Growth Spurts Happen?You're not imagining it! Find out what happens during baby’s growth spurts.How to Help a Gassy BabyHere's why your baby may be gassy and infant-safe treatments for baby gas.11 Reasons Your Baby Won't SleepSolutions to issues that may be keeping your baby from sleeping through the night.Gripe Water for BabiesLearn about this herbal treatment for gassy, fussy infants and see if it's safe.What is Sleep Regression?Here's when they happen, how long they last and what you can do to help baby sleep better.ToolsBaby TrackerTopicsToddler Month-by-MonthHealth and SafetyGrowth and DevelopmentFeeding Your ToddlerToddler SleepPotty TrainingActivities and PlayLearningSee All Toddler TopicsRecommended ReadingWhy Is Your Toddler Waking Up Too Early and What Should You Do About It?Use these tips to adjust your early riser's sleep schedule.How to Potty Train Your Toddler in Three DaysHeard about the 3-day potty training method? Here's how to make it work.How to Handle Toddler Night TerrorsHere’s what these sleep episodes are and some easy ways to handle them in your child.Why Toddlers Refuse to Eat and What to DoShe used to gobble up everything you put on her plate — but now your toddler who won’t eat.What to Do if Your Toddler Refuses to PoopYou wait, but it's a no-go. What to do if your toddler has trouble pooping on the potty.TopicsAdoptionFamily FinancesSecond Time ParentsChildproofingMental Health in ChildrenCar SafetyTraveling With KidsRelationshipsFamily ChangesRecipesSee All Family TopicsRecommended ReadingWhat is the Best Age Gap Between Kids?While there’s no "ideal" age gap between children, there are things to think about.10 Best Second Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Baby Number Two (or Three!)Big feelings and big siblings!Where to Find Financial Help as a Single MomThese services provide financial aid to low- and middle-income single mothers.Do Babies Need Passports?Everything you need to know in order to get a U.S. passport for a baby.When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower?There's no right or wrong time to celebrate your new arrival.TopicsTop Baby Names for BoysTop Baby Names for GirlsBest Gender-Neutral NamesUncommon Baby NamesUnique Girl NamesUnique Boy NamesSee All Baby Names TopicsRecommended ReadingTop Baby Boy Names That Start With ASee the most popular baby boy names that start with the letter A.Top Baby Girl Names That Start With JSee the most popular baby girl names that start with the letter J.Top Baby Girl Names That Start With MSee the most popular baby girl names that start with the letter M.Top Baby Girl Names That Start With SSee the most popular baby girl names that start with the letter S.Top Baby Boy Names That Start With KSee the most popular baby boy names that start with the letter K.TopicsCustom ChecklistMy RegistriesMy PerksTake the QuizRegistry 101See All Registry BuilderTopicsAmazon Prime DayCar SeatsMaternity ClothesNursing & FeedingDiaperingBaby MonitorsBaby CarriersBaby CareNurseryToysStrollersSee All Baby ProductsRecommended ReadingBest Pregnancy PillowsFinally get some sleep with one of these comfortable, supportive body pillows.Best Prenatal VitaminsHere’s how to choose the best prenatal vitamin for you, according to doctors.Free Baby SamplesBringing home baby isn't cheap, but these freebies can help you save big.Best Baby DealsWe scoured the web for the best markdowns on brands that What to Expect parents love.Best Breast PumpsFinding the right breast pump can make feedings easier for you and baby.ToolsFirst Trimester Must-HavesSecond Trimester Must-HavesThird Trimester Must-HavesTopicsFeatured & PopularBirth Month GroupsGetting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearFamilyHealthStagesInternationalUnited StatesAll Groups A-ZSee All Community Groups Sign UpSign Out Getting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearToddlerFamilyBaby NamesRegistry BuilderBaby ProductsCommunity Groups News Getting PregnantFertilityOvulationPreparing for PregnancyPreconception HealthInfertilitySee All Getting Pregnant TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhat is Implantation Bleeding and When Does It Occur?Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of OvulationDoes a Faint Line on a Pregnancy Test Mean You're Pregnant?When Does Implantation Occur?How to Have a Boy or a GirlTOOLSOvulation CalculatorIVF Due Date CalculatorPregnancyPregnancy Week-by-WeekPregnancy SymptomsLabor & DeliveryPreparing for BabyFetal DevelopmentScreenings & TestsBaby’s Zodiac SignBaby ShowersPregnancy ComplicationsSee All Pregnancy TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGEarly Signs of PregnancyManaging Morning Sickness and Nausea During PregnancySigns of LaborChanges or Decreases in Fetal MovementSigns You Are Having a Boy or GirlBraxton Hicks Contractions and False LaborTOOLSPregnancy Due Date CalculatorConception Date CalculatorPregnancy Weight Gain CalculatorChinese Gender PredictorFirst YearBaby Month-by-MonthPostpartum RecoveryNewbornsMilestonesBreastfeedingBottle-FeedingIntroducing SolidsBaby SleepVaccinesSleep SchedulesFeeding SchedulesSee All First Year TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhen Do Baby Growth Spurts Happen?How to Help a Gassy Baby11 Reasons Your Baby Won't SleepGripe Water for BabiesWhat is Sleep Regression?TOOLSBaby TrackerToddlerToddler Month-by-MonthHealth and SafetyGrowth and DevelopmentFeeding Your ToddlerToddler SleepPotty TrainingActivities and PlayLearningSee All Toddler TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhy Is Your Toddler Waking Up Too Early and What Should You Do About It?How to Potty Train Your Toddler in Three DaysHow to Handle Toddler Night TerrorsWhy Toddlers Refuse to Eat and What to DoWhat to Do if Your Toddler Refuses to PoopFamilyAdoptionFamily FinancesSecond Time ParentsChildproofingMental Health in ChildrenCar SafetyTraveling With KidsRelationshipsFamily ChangesRecipesSee All Family TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGWhat is the Best Age Gap Between Kids?10 Best Second Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Baby Number Two (or Three!)Where to Find Financial Help as a Single MomDo Babies Need Passports?When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower?Baby NamesTop Baby Names for BoysTop Baby Names for GirlsBest Gender-Neutral NamesUncommon Baby NamesUnique Girl NamesUnique Boy NamesSee All Baby Names TopicsRECOMMENDED READINGTop Baby Boy Names That Start With ATop Baby Girl Names That Start With JTop Baby Girl Names That Start With MTop Baby Girl Names That Start With STop Baby Boy Names That Start With KRegistry BuilderCustom ChecklistMy RegistriesMy PerksTake the QuizRegistry 101See All Registry BuilderBaby ProductsAmazon Prime DayCar SeatsMaternity ClothesNursing & FeedingDiaperingBaby MonitorsBaby CarriersBaby CareNurseryToysStrollersSee All Baby ProductsRECOMMENDED READINGBest Pregnancy PillowsBest Prenatal VitaminsFree Baby SamplesBest Baby DealsBest Breast PumpsTOOLSFirst Trimester Must-HavesSecond Trimester Must-HavesThird Trimester Must-HavesCommunity GroupsFeatured & PopularBirth Month GroupsGetting PregnantPregnancyFirst YearFamilyHealthStagesInternationalUnited StatesAll Groups A-ZSee All Community GroupsNewsPregnancy > Your HealthShould You Get the Flu Shot During Pregnancy? by Colleen de Bellefonds Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D. Medical Review PolicyAll What to Expect content that addresses health or safety is medically reviewed by a team of vetted health professionals. Our Medical Review Board includes OB/GYNs, pediatricians, infectious disease specialists, doulas, lactation counselors, endocrinologists, fertility specialists and more. We believe you should always know the source of the information you're reading. Learn more about our editorial and medical review policies. | February 8, 2023 Latest update:Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.See moreAlamyIt’s not only safe to get the flu shot while pregnant, it’s also a really smart move. Learn how getting a flu shot during pregnancy protects both you and your baby.Back to Top In This Article Is the flu shot during pregnancy safe? Should I get the flu shot while I'm pregnant? Where can I get a flu shot when I'm pregnant? When should I get a flu shot during pregnancy? Does the flu shot have mercury in it?Time to roll up your sleeve for your flu shot! The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says getting the flu shot during pregnancy is a must for all moms-to-be.That’s because if you come down with influenza (aka the flu) when you’re expecting, you’re at greater risk of developing serious complications like pneumonia or other acute respiratory illnesses, which could land you in the hospital. Another huge plus is that the shot helps protect your baby after she’s born and until she’s old enough for her own shot at 6 months old.Read on for some of the most common questions and answers about the flu shot and pregnancy.Is the flu shot during pregnancy safe?Yes, the flu shot during pregnancy is not only safe and effective, it’s a must. The seasonal flu shot has been given safely to millions of pregnant women over many years and has not been shown to cause harm to expecting moms or their babies. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionFlu Vaccine Safety and PregnancySee All Sources [1] Getting the flu shot while you're breastfeeding after baby is born is also safe and strongly recommended. In fact, women who get the flu vaccine while pregnant or breastfeeding also develop antibodies against flu that they can share with their infants through their breast milk.Should I get the flu shot while I'm pregnant?Yes, you should definitely get the flu shot while you're pregnant. That's because the flu can be dangerous during pregnancy, since pregnant women are at a higher risk of (and more likely to be hospitalized with) serious flu complications like pneumonia. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionInfluenza (Flu) Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources [2]Getting the flu shot during pregnancy offers the greatest protection against the influenza viruses that are expected to cause the most problems in a particular year and does significantly increase the chance that you will escape the season flu-free. Continue Reading Below Read This Next Colds During Pregnancy Flu While Pregnant: How to Stay Safe The Flu (Influenza Virus) in Babies and Toddlers Colds During Pregnancy Flu While Pregnant: How to Stay Safe The Flu (Influenza Virus) in Babies and Toddlers Track your symptoms with the My Journal tool in our free appPlus, on the off-chance that you get the vaccine and still get sick with the flu, having the flu shot means your symptoms will likely be milder and you'll be less likely to be hospitalized.What's more, getting the flu shot during pregnancy isn’t just for your own protection: Your baby-to-be benefits too, even after you've given birth. Plenty of research shows that babies whose moms got the flu vaccine during pregnancy are less likely to catch the virus after they're born, and they’re protected against the virus until they’re old enough to get their own shot, at 6 months.In addition, babies whose moms got the flu shot while pregnant are also less likely to be born prematurely, are bigger and healthier, and are even less likely to be hospitalized from the flu or its complications during the first year than babies whose moms weren't vaccinated.Where can I get a flu shot when I'm pregnant?Many OB/GYN, midwife and family medicine practices offer the flu shot to pregnant patients. You can also stop by a flu shot clinic at your local pharmacy or supermarket.And since the CDC puts pregnant women at the top of the priority list for getting the flu shot (along with the elderly and children), you’ll likely head to the front of the line, even if the vaccine is in short supply.Keep in mind that you’ll have to stick with the needle when it comes to your seasonal flu vaccine, since the nasal spray vaccine (which is made from live flu virus) is not approved for pregnant women.When should I get a flu shot during pregnancy?Flu season can last from as early as October until as late as May. The CDC recommends getting a flu shot as early in each flu season as possible (preferably by early to late October) so you’re protected from the start.But it’s never too late to get immunized. So if you haven’t yet been vaccinated against the flu, go now! And remember: The vaccine is updated yearly, and immunity wanes with time — so even if you got the flu shot last year, you need to get one again this season.Does the flu shot have mercury in it?Only some multi-dose flu vaccines have a tiny amount of thimerosal, an ethyl mercury-based preservative in multi-dose vials. But there is no evidence that exposure to thimerosal in this (or any) vaccine causes harm, although it may cause minor redness and swelling at the injection site.Both the CDC and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) say that thimerosal is safe for pregnant women and doesn't cause any harm to them or their growing babies. But if you’re still uneasy about it, you can ask for a thimerosal-free flu shot. Bottom line: There are many reasons you should get a flu shot when you’re pregnant. But if you still have concerns, discuss them with your doctor. Being informed should help with any doubts.From the What to Expect editorial team and Heidi Murkoff, author of What to Expect When You're Expecting. What to Expect follows strict reporting guidelines and uses only credible sources, such as peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions and highly respected health organizations. Learn how we keep our content accurate and up-to-date by reading our medical review and editorial policy.SourcesReferences Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Flu Vaccine Safety and Pregnancy, December 2022. | Show in the articleCenters for Disease Control and Prevention, Influenza (Flu) Vaccine and Pregnancy, December 2019. | Show in the articleWhat to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff.WhatToExpect.com, Vaccines to Get Before and During Pregnancy, August 2021.WhatToExpect.com, Flu While Pregnant : How to Stay Safe, September 2022.WhatToExpect.com, Influenza Vaccine (The Flu Shot) for Babies and Children, November 2022.WhatToExpect.com, Fever During Pregnancy, November 2022.WhatToExpect.com, What to Know About COVID-19 if You're Pregnant, August 2022.American College for Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Influenza Vaccination During Pregnancy, April 2018 (reaffirmed 2021).Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine [LAIV] (The Nasal Spray Flu Vaccine), August 2022.American Academy of Pediatrics, Pediatrics, Recommendations for Prevention and Control of Influenza in Children, 2022-2023.Mayo Clinic, Is It Safe to Get a Flu Shot During Pregnancy?, September 2022.Updates history February 8, 2023Editor: Christine Gordon/Catherine Donaldson-EvansUpdated and medically reviewed to include the latest guidelines and practices, and for tone and style.Was this article helpful? Yes No Thanks for your feedback!Related TopicsYour HealthPregnancyPregnancy GroupsFirst TrimesterJump to Your Week of PregnancyPregnancy Week 1 Pregnancy Week 2 Pregnancy Week 3 Pregnancy Week 4 Pregnancy Week 5 Pregnancy Week 6 Pregnancy Week 7 Pregnancy Week 8 Pregnancy Week 9 Pregnancy Week 10 Pregnancy Week 11 Pregnancy Week 12 Pregnancy Week 13 Pregnancy Week 14 Pregnancy Week 15 Pregnancy Week 16 Pregnancy Week 17 Pregnancy Week 18 Pregnancy Week 19 Pregnancy Week 20 Pregnancy Week 21 Pregnancy Week 22 Pregnancy Week 23 Pregnancy Week 24 Pregnancy Week 25 Pregnancy Week 26 Pregnancy Week 27 Pregnancy Week 28 Pregnancy Week 29 Pregnancy Week 30 Pregnancy Week 31 Pregnancy Week 32 Pregnancy Week 33 Pregnancy Week 34 Pregnancy Week 35 Pregnancy Week 36 Pregnancy Week 37 Pregnancy Week 38 Pregnancy Week 39 Pregnancy Week 40 Pregnancy Week 41 Pregnancy Week 42 Trending On What to ExpectSigns of Labor Pregnancy Calculator⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled.Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our partners.Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S.Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S.Braxton Hicks Contractions and False LaborFollow us on Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window Opens a new window About What to Expect What to Expect Apps Popular Topics About Us Contact Us Press Center Advertise With Us About Heidi Murkoff Accessibility What to Expect Project Medical Review Policy What to Expect Bookstore Health Data Privacy Policy Advertising Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Help AdChoices Feedback Popular Articles Top Boy Names Top Girl Names Ovulation Symptoms Implantation Bleeding Early Signs of Pregnancy When Does Morning Sickness Start? Losing Your Mucus Plug What is a Rainbow Baby? When Do Babies Start Crawling? When Do Babies Start Talking? Round Ligament Pain Pitocin Induction Tools & Registry Due Date Calculator Ovulation Calculator Chinese Gender Predictor Registry Builder Best Prenatal Vitamins Best Baby Strollers Best Breast Pumps Best Pacifiers Best Baby Bouncers Best High Chairs Best Baby Sunscreen Amazon October Prime Day Baby Deals The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy. © 2005-2024 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.A property of Opens a new window Please Join Us to Keep ReadingSign up now to gain FREE unlimited access to all discussions.Sign UpAlready a member? Log InCongratulations!Enjoy your FREE unlimited access to all discussionsSpurt in cold and flu cases, symptoms lasting longer than usual, say doctors | Bengaluru - Hindustan Times Explore Search Tuesday, Nov 12, 2024 New Delhi oC Subscribe Games E-Paper Sign in My Account Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Enjoy unlimited access Subscribe Now! Get features like Ad lite A Minimal Ad Experience HT Premium Articles Expertly crafted articles Quickreads Segment News brief in summary format HT E-paper Access digital news experience Start 14 Days Free Trial Home Assembly Elections 2024 HT Premium HTCity Loan ₹10 Lakh India World Real Estate Powered by Entertainment Trending Astrology Lifestyle Education Business Cities Latest News Games & Puzzles IPL Auction Win iPhone 15 The Taste of Time Photos Web Stories Sports Delhi News Mumbai News Bengaluru News Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games + 5 more Technology Quickreads Daily Digest Following Games Spurt in cold and flu cases, symptoms lasting longer than usual, say doctors ByHT Correspondent, Bengaluru Feb 09, 2023 12:35 AM IST Share Via Copy Link With no restrictions in place and travel and socialising back in full swing, doctors said there is an unusual trend in the rise in cold and flu cases, especially after Covid. Doctors in Bengaluru are noticing a spurt in cold and flu cases over the last two months, with symptoms lasting longer than usual. Doctors in Bengaluru are noticing a spurt in cold and flu cases over the last two months, with symptoms lasting longer than usual. (PTI) With no restrictions in place and travel and socialising back in full swing, doctors said there is an unusual trend in the rise in cases, especially after Covid. Dr Sunil Kumar Dodderi, epidemiologist and public health specialist, said while there is a rise in cold and flu cases recently, the severity is less. “Most of the symptoms subside quickly, but the cough is persistent for a longer duration than one week-two week, sometimes more than two weeks. The trend of long-lasting cough is more after Covid.” Dr Aditya S Chowti, senior consultant of internal medicine at Fortis Hospital, said there is a definitive rise in cold and flu cases in Bengaluru. “There is an unusual trend in the rise in the number of cases, probably because Bengaluru has been having some treacherous weather changes over the past one or two months. However, I would like to note that the severity is not too much. They are most likely flu-like illnesses,” Dr Chowti said. Dr Chowti pointed out that these infections are recurring, with patients coming in with the same complaints again. “This is the unusual trend going around in the past two months. The symptoms are also lasting longer than usual. You could say this is a trend we are seeing after Covid.” Dr Basavaraj Kuntoji, consultant of internal medicine at Manipal Hospital, said that as a physician, he sees about three to four patients every day in the age group of 18-60 who present with symptoms of fever, throat pain, cough, body pain, and weakness. “Although most of these patients test negative for Covid-19 and Influenza, very few turn out to be influenza positive. A persistent cough can remain for up to two weeks and may be spreading to family members. But luckily, this doesn’t need hospitalisation and can be prevented with certain measures,” Dr Kuntoji added. Dr Subrata Das, senior consultant, of internal medicine and diabetology, at Sakra World Hospital, said for the past two to three weeks, there have been 10 to 12 flu cases per day. “The majority of these patients have fevers and exhibit symptoms including runny noses, wheezing, stuffiness, and nausea. Covid is currently negative, and the positivity rate in the 15 to 20 influenza-like illnesses and about 20 to 30% were positive for influenza A,” Dr Das said. Meanwhile, Dr Neha Mishra, consultant of infectious diseases at Manipal Hospital, said that viral illnesses like flu and influenza are generally prevalent during monsoon and colder seasons. “But in tropical countries like India, it can prevail around the year. Hence the seasonal changes and patterns of flu observed in other parts of the world may not be very clear. Bengaluru being a colder place than other cities in India, flu-like illnesses can occur at any time of the year.” “Although the number of cases may seem slightly higher, it’s likely due to increased awareness and people seeking medical help more often than usual, when they fall sick, which is a good trend and can reduce complications associated with these illnesses,” Dr Mishra said. In the case of the pediatric population, Dr Yogesh Kumar Gupta, a consultant paediatrician at Fortis Hospital, said they are seeing a two-threefold rise in flu cases between the age group of 1-10 years predominantly. “I have consulted around 20-30 cases of cold, cough and fever in the last two months. As per the history and when tested, 30-40% of them are turning out to be Influenza A/B positive. It is a little unusual, but their symptoms are taking a little longer to settle compared to earlier,” Dr Gupta said. Dr Sundar C Ingaleshwar, consultant and paediatric intensivist at Manipal Hospital, said children below five years of age and particularly below two years are more susceptible to seasonal flu infections as they lack immunity against them. “Flu attacks vary in severity each season. This season we have encountered a greater number of viral flu infections caused by RSV, adenovirus and rhinovirus infections, which varied from simple cough cold and fever to severe pneumonia landing children in ICU.” Dr Leenatha Reddy N, consultant of paediatrics and neonatology at Kinder Women’s Hospital and Fertility Centre, said anyone could get the flu but infection rates are highest among children (20-30% annually), especially those less than five years old. “This is mainly because of weaker immune systems and lack of appropriate hand hygiene, lack of vaccine for infants less than 6-month-old etc.” Dr Mishra said the spike in illnesses could also be attributed to a little bit of laxity in the safety measures people were following during the pandemic. “The preventive measures followed back then also reduced the transmission of other viruses.” Epidemiologist and public health specialist, Dr Dodderi attributed it to new pathogens and air pollution. “Reasons could be new pathogens which need research. Another reason could be air pollution. Air pollution is one of the precipitating factors for respiratory infections. It is one of the triggering factors for asthma, an influenza-like illness. Another reason is, because of covid, other viruses were snubbed, and now they are emerging again,” Dr Dodderi said. Dr Gupta said that now that there has undoubtedly been a change in flu patterns, the reason could be a change in virulence of the virus, as there was not much exposure for the last two years and a change in the immune pattern of susceptible individuals. Advising precautions, doctors said it is crucial to avoid crowded places, travel if not necessary, practice good hand and respiratory hygiene, and seek medical advice if symptoms persist for more than two days. “To prevent the spread of illness, it’s crucial to avoid crowded places and travel if not necessary, wear masks while going out or have people around with symptoms, and practice good hygiene and healthy habits. I encourage anyone experiencing these symptoms to seek medical attention if not feeling better in a day or two,” Dr Kuntoji said. “Flu vaccines are available to children, which will protect against most influenza strains, reducing the severity of infections in children. Restricting children to home isolation and early treatment can reduce the spread of infections, particularly at schools,” Dr Ingaleshwar said. Catch every big hit,... See more Catch every big hit, every wicket with Crickit, a one stop destination for Live Scores, Match Stats, Infographics & much more. Explore now!Stay updated Karnataka Election Results 2024 and with all the Breaking News and Latest News from Bengaluru. Click here for comprehensive coverage of top cities including Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, and more across India . Stay informed on the latest happenings in World News. News / Cities / Bengaluru News / Spurt in cold and flu cases, symptoms lasting longer than usual, say doctors SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON SHARE Copy Whatsapp Twitter Facebook Linkedin [Best Deals] Best air purifier brands for a healthier home: Fight pollution with top picks Best geysers in India: Top 11 energy-saving water heaters you can trust Best top load washing machines: Top 10 efficient, and effective options for you Best serums for sensitive skin: 10 top picks to soothe and nourish your skin Best 5 star geysers for home: Top 10 instant water heaters to choose from View All Join Hindustan Times Create free account and unlock exciting features like Newsletters, Alerts and Recommendations Get personalised news and exciting deals Bookmark the stories you want to read later REGISTER FOR FREE Already have an account? Sign In SKIP Subscribe to our best newsletters HT Daily Capsule Sign Up to Subscribe Newsletter subscribed successfully Latest News World News India News Cricket Live Score Cricket Schedule T20 World Cup Suryakumar Yadav Virat Kohli Yashasvi Jaiswal Axar Patel Hardik Pandya Ravindra Jadeja Shivam Dube Rishabh Pant Sanju Samson Arshdeep Singh Jasprit Bumrah Kuldeep Yadav Mohammed Siraj Yuzvendra Chahal Tim David David Warner Cameron Green Travis Head India vs Sri Lanka India vs South Africa India vs Pakistan India vs Netherlands India vs Ireland India vs England India vs Bangladesh India vs Australia India vs Afghanistan CITY NEWS Bengaluru News Bhopal News Chandigarh News Chennai News Dehradun News Delhi News Gurugram News Hyderabad News Indore News Jaipur News Kolkata News Lucknow News Mumbai News Noida News Patna News Pune News Ranchi News Other Cities Entertainment Bollywood News Hollywood News Music Tamil Cinema Telugu Cinema TV Web Series Entertainment Others Books HT Insight Brand Post Brand Stories Elections Upcoming Elections Income Tax Calculator ASTROLOGY Horoscope Education Admission News Board Exams Competitive Exams Employment News Exam Results Education News LIFESTYLE Art and Culture Brunch Fashion Festivals Health Recipes Relationship Travel Pet Web Stories Trending Business Photos Videos Environment Science Opinion Editorials Car and Bike Technology Sports Badminton Football Hockey Tennis Others Quickreads Covid 19 Assembly Election GAMES Daily Sudoku Daily Crossword Daily Word Jumble TRENDING NEWS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News Live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Pushpa 2 Trailer Singham Again box office collection IPL 2025 Auction Maharashtra Election 2024 Jharkhand Election 2024 Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Score LIVE Cricket Schedule Gold rate World News TRENDING TOPICS CBSE Date Sheet 2025 UP Police Constable Result 2024 Live UGC NET 2024 Live SSC CGL Result 2024 Live India News Live Entertainment News Live World News Live Trending News Live US News live Bollywood News LIVE Hollywood News Live Horoscope Today LIVE Cricket News Live Sanjiv Khanna Gautam Gambhir Pushpa 2 Trailer Singham Again box office collection Maharashtra Assembly Election 2024 IPL Auction 2025 Jharkhand Assembly Election Assembly Election 2024 Cricket Cricket Match Today India News World News Latest Stories Who is Elise Stefanik? 6 facts about new US ambassador to United Nations Sachin Tendulkar, Virat Kohli's elite ODI records shattered by Rahmanullah Gurbaz as Afghanistan script BAN series win Haryana Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 21.73 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Punjab Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 19.13 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Jammu and Kashmir Weather and AQI Today: Cool start at -15.84 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Uttarakhand Weather and AQI Today: Check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Himachal Pradesh Weather and AQI Today: Check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Gurugram Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 20.02 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Noida news Live Today November 12, 2024 : Noida Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 20.16 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 Noida Weather and AQI Today: Warm start at 20.16 °C, check weather forecast for November 12, 2024 About Us Contact us Terms of use Privacy policy Weather Today HT Newsletters Subscription Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Site Map RSS Feeds © 2024 HindustanTimes Click to Top Story Saved Live Score OPEN APP Edit Profile Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Your Subscription Plan Renew Subscription Manage Subscription Saved Articles Following My Reads Sign out New Delhi 0C Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Start 14 Days Free Trial Subscribe Now Home HTLS 2023 Astrology India News Lifestyle Entertainment Elections Trending Videos Education Photos Sports Cities Daily Digest Quickreads Opinion Analysis For You Following Web Stories Science HT Games Podcasts Weather Technology Latest News Cricket India vs Sri Lanka Live Cricket Score Cricket Teams Cricket Players ICC Rankings Cricket Schedule Shreyas Iyer Harshit Rana Kusal Mendis Ravi Bishnoi Rinku Singh Riyan Parag Washington Sundar Avishka Fernando Charith Asalanka Dasun Shanaka Khaleel Ahmed Pathum Nissanka World News US News Cities Delhi Mumbai Bengaluru Gurugram Noida Hyderabad Chennai Kolkata Bhopal Chandigarh Dehradun Indore Jaipur Lucknow Patna Pune Ranchi Other Cities Business Income Tax Calculator Petrol Prices UGC NET Answer Key 2024 Live Diesel Prices Gold Rate Silver Rate Lifestyle Fashion Health Relationships Art and Culture Travel Recipes Festivals Pet Brunch Entertainment Bollywood TV Web Series Music Hollywood Telugu Cinema Tamil Cinema Anime Education Study Abroad Board Exams JEE Exam Results Admission News Employment News Competitive Exams BBA Colleges Engineering Colleges Medical Colleges BCA Colleges BBA Exams BCA Exams Medical Exams Engineering Exams Astrology Horoscope Love Horoscope Tarot Chinese Panchang Annual Horoscope Festival Calendar Compatibility Calculator Career Horoscope Manifestation Transits HT Premium E-Paper The Economist Articles HT Insider HT Insight Elections 2024 Lok Sabha States Lok Sabha Parties Lok Sabha Candidates Videos india news infocus HT Insight Explainer Video On The Record HT Weekend Aur Batao Vikram Chandra Daily Wrap Photos Entertainment Photos Lifestyle Photos News Photos Sports Olympics 2024 Olympics Medal Tally Other Sports Sports Football Tennis EPL 2023-24 ISL 2023-24 Hockey Asian Games 2023 HT Insight Public Health Economic Policy International Affairs Climate Change Gender Equality knowledge future tech Governance More from HT HT Epaper Auto HT Tech HT Bangla HT School Quiz HT Friday Finance HT Premium Explore Hindustan Times HT Newsletters Weather Today About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Disclaimer Print Ad Rates Code of Ethics Sitemap RSS Feeds Subscription - Terms of Use Copyright © HT Digital Streams Ltd. All rights reserved. Follow Us On My Account Sign in Home Cricket Premium Games Sign In // // //Masking may not have eased respiratory virus surge in the fall: PHO document | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Masking may not have eased respiratory virus surge in the fall: PHO document | CBC News LoadedTorontoMasking may not have eased respiratory virus surge in the fall: PHO documentIntroducing a mask mandate when respiratory viruses surged in the fall may not have eased the crush on pediatric hospitals, a Public Health Ontario science brief obtained by The Canadian Press concludes.Ontario's chief medical officer of health says he does not see a mask mandate now or in the futureLiam Casey and Allison Jones · The Canadian Press · Posted: Feb 06, 2023 6:20 AM EST | Last Updated: March 8, 2023Dr. Kieran Moore, Ontario's chief medical officer of health places his mask on as holds a news conference regarding the lifting of most mask mandates for indoor settings in Ontario at Queen's Park in Toronto on March 9, 2022. (Nathan Denette/The Canadian Press)Social SharingIntroducing a mask mandate when respiratory viruses surged in the fall may not have eased the crush on pediatric hospitals, a Public Health Ontario science brief obtained by The Canadian Press concludes.The brief — which was not proactively made public, unlike the reports done by the now-defunct science table predecessor — provides a glimpse of the evidence on which Chief Medical Officer of Health Dr. Kieran Moore made his decision to go no further than a "strong" recommendation on masking in mid-November.The effects of masking on the transmission of COVID-19 are strong, the brief from late November notes. Mandates may not have produced more of a benefit than recommendations, its research suggests.Toronto's top doctor asked to 'urgently explore' bringing back mask mandates amid surge in respiratory illnessBut with influenza and respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, circulating at the time as well as COVID-19, the benefits of mask mandates became less clear for the group of experts."Current evidence suggests that adherence to masking, in addition to other layered measures such as self-screening, staying home when ill, and vaccination, are likely to prevent transmission of influenza, RSV and COVID-19 in children and youth, especially in indoor community settings where transmission is high," the PHO document concludes."Given the number of respiratory viruses currently in circulation, there is less certainty about the potential magnitude of the effect on transmission."It is also uncertain whether potential decreases in transmission are sufficient to reduce pediatric emergency department visits, hospitalization, and ICU admission to preserve capacity within the health-care system."WATCH | Health-care system braces for triple threat of COVID-19, flu and RSV: Concerns grow over triple threat of surging respiratory illnesses2 years agoDuration 2:50The Ontario Medical Association is urging people to wear masks indoors and get their flu and COVID-19 shots as concern builds that a spike in flu cases could overwhelm a health-care system already seeing an influx of RSV and COVID patients.That brief settled the debate for the province's top doctor."The body of evidence for strictly implementing a mask mandate wasn't there," Dr. Moore told The Canadian Press in a recent interview."In no jurisdiction has there been a mandatory masking recommendation, nor has our expert panel recommended that to us."Ontario top doctor doesn't see mask mandate now or in futureMoore said he does not see a mask mandate now or in the future. In mid-November, Moore wasn't so sure.Respiratory viruses led to a massive surge in young patients who needed hospitalization. Intensive care units and emergency departments at the major children's hospitals across the province saw historic volumes from October to December.The surge forced children's hospitals in Toronto, Ottawa, Hamilton and London, Ont., to cancel surgeries in order to free up staff and beds to deal with the problem.On Nov. 14, Moore held a news conference where he "strongly" recommended the public wear masks in indoor settings to protect children from circulating respiratory viruses. He said he was discussing and reviewing the possibility of mandating masks in schools again.That same day, Moore's office requested help from Public Health Ontario."The Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health requested a summary of evidence on the effectiveness of mask-wearing, particularly among children and youth, in the context of circulating influenza, RSV and COVID-19," the brief said."Information about public acceptability of mask mandates was also requested."PHO brief says no evidence masks help ease influenza, RSV transmissionTen days later, Public Health Ontario responded with a 14-page brief.There was little evidence in scientific literature on the sole effects of masking on the transmission of influenza and RSV, it notes."We were unable to identify data on the effectiveness of community-level masking in preventing transmission of influenza or RSV," the document says."However, widespread mask use in general or targeted populations may be expected to reduce the rate of transmission of viral respiratory pathogens in the community."The effects of masking on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 — the virus that causes COVID-19 — is much stronger, the document notes, including evidence by the province's now-defunct science table."It reported that mask mandates were associated with a lower incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to schools without mask mandates," the document says.The brief references a Public Health Ontario synthesis of research in March 2022, which noted "positive effects of mask mandates in the community setting and reductions in COVID-19 case growth, hospitalizations and deaths. However, there was limited evidence to suggest greater effectiveness of mask mandates when compared to mask recommendations for the outcome of COVID-19 case rate reduction."Flu, COVID declining in Ontario but new variant gaining ground, top doctor saysOntario's health minister says masking 'a personal choice,' a day after top doctor urges public to do soThe scientists also looked to Google to find any polling done on the public acceptability of mask mandates.They found a Forum Poll conducted on Nov. 8 that showed 53 per cent of respondents agreed that a mask mandate should be re-implemented in Ontario. They also found a Nanos Research poll conducted for CTV News from Oct. 30 to Nov. 2 that found 69 per cent of respondents would support the return of mask mandates to some extent.The brief was never released publicly until The Canadian Press asked for it.Doctor says brief should have been made publicPublic Health Ontario took a week to decide whether to release it, and the agency said it ultimately did in the interest of transparency. Public Health Ontario declined interview requests and only responded to questions through email."This document was not shared publicly as it was in response to a request from (Moore's office) and not intended as a stand-alone document," the email from PHO Media Relations said.Moore did not answer a question about why the document was never made public.The former scientific director of the old voluntary science table reviewed the brief after it was shared by The Canadian Press.Dr. Fahad Razak called it an "even-handed assessment of the evidence.""It found what I believe to be true, which is that, in totality, the evidence suggests that masking does reduce spread in a school setting," said Razak, an internist at St. Michael's Hospital and a University of Toronto professor.But Razak said the brief should have been made public when it was given to Moore in late November as debates around mask mandates swirled.The former science table, which Public Health Ontario dissolved in September, published all of its work online at the same time it gave its reports and recommendations to the government, public health officials and the clinical community."As scientists and policy experts, we never believed that the decision was ours to make," Razak said. "We believed that what was really important was providing timely information in a way that allowed best decisions to be made by the public and by decision makers," he said.Ontario's top doctor strongly recommends masking indoors as health system faces 'extraordinary pressures'Ontario Premier Doug Ford urges masking, stops short of imposing mandateMisinformation often occupies the space left in an information vacuum, Razak said."If you read the social media posts and the blogs and the concerns of people who distrust vaccines, for example, a lot of it stems from this idea that critical information is being kept behind closed doors," he said."So that's part of the thought process, which is driving misinformation and I think that's one of the critical reasons why you want to establish transparency and timely reporting of data and analysis as a scientific body."The province's new science table was formed under Public Health Ontario at the end of last year and Moore said it has only met a few times.CorrectionsA previous version of this story was headlined "Masking likely wouldn't have eased respiratory virus surge in the fall: PHO document." The headline has been revised to more accurately reflect the content of the article.Mar 08, 2023 1:59 PM ETCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorFooter LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canow