Avian influenza takes flight in humans by evading restriction | Nature Reviews Microbiology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature reviews microbiology research highlights article Research Highlight Published: 05 July 2023 Viral evolutionAvian influenza takes flight in humans by evading restriction Andrea Du Toit1 Nature Reviews Microbiology volume 21, page 551 (2023)Cite this article 1077 Accesses 1 Citations 260 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusViral evolutionVirus–host interactions Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Influenza A viruses (IAVs) circulate in a wide range of host species, including wild and economically important birds. IAVs can cross into new species such as humans (spillover), which may cause severe disease and mortality, and in the event of subsequent human-to-human transmission could result in the generation of pandemic strains. There are several barriers that prevent the transmission and adaptation of avian IAV into humans, such as binding specificity of the viral haemagglutinin receptor or the host antiviral factor Mx1. However, there are several gaps in our understanding of what enables spillover into humans and in our ability to predict the zoonotic potential of the virus. In this study, Palmarini and colleagues report that human butyrophilin subfamily 3 member A3 (BTN3A3) restricts replication of avian IAVs but not human IAVs, and that BTN3A3 evasion promotes spillover into humans.Further experiments showed that the key determinants of BTN3A3 sensitivity are phenylalanine at position 313 and tyrosine at position 52 in the avian viral nucleoprotein (NP; a viral protein that is crucial for viral transcription, replication and packaging, as well as for trafficking of viral ribonucleoproteins (vRNPs)). By contrast, BTN3A3-resistant avian viruses exhibited tyrosine or valine at position 313, and asparagine, histidine or glutamine at position 52 of viral NP. Of note, the NPs of human viruses, which evade BTN3A3, almost exclusively have a tyrosine or valine at position 313. This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.com Buy this article Purchase on SpringerLink Instant access to full article PDF Buy now Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support ReferencesOriginal articlePinto, R. M. et al. BTN3A3 evasion promotes the zoonotic potential of influenza A viruses. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06261-8 (2023)Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAuthor informationAuthors and AffiliationsNature Reviews Microbiology http://www.nature.comrmicro/Andrea Du ToitAuthorsAndrea Du ToitView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence to Andrea Du Toit.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleDu Toit, A. Avian influenza takes flight in humans by evading restriction. Nat Rev Microbiol 21, 551 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-023-00943-wDownload citationPublished: 05 July 2023Issue Date: September 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-023-00943-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Editorial policies About the Editors Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Journal Credits Editorial input and checks Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Publishing model Calendars Conferences Posters Web Feeds Contact Publish with us For Authors For Referees Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Reviews Microbiology (Nat Rev Microbiol) ISSN 1740-1534 (online) ISSN 1740-1526 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingFrontiers | RIG-I agonist SLR10 promotes macrophage M1 polarization during influenza virus infection Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Immunology About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumPress officeCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Immunology Sections Sections Alloimmunity and TransplantationAntigen Presenting Cell BiologyAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders : Autoimmune DisordersAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders: Autoinflammatory DisordersB Cell BiologyCancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyComparative ImmunologyCytokines and Soluble Mediators in ImmunityImmunological MemoryImmunological Tolerance and RegulationInflammationMicrobial ImmunologyMolecular Innate ImmunityMucosal ImmunityMultiple Sclerosis and NeuroimmunologyNK and Innate Lymphoid Cell BiologyNutritional ImmunologyParasite ImmunologyPrimary ImmunodeficienciesSystems ImmunologyT Cell BiologyVaccines and Molecular TherapeuticsViral Immunology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumPress officeCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Immunology Sections Sections Alloimmunity and TransplantationAntigen Presenting Cell BiologyAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders : Autoimmune DisordersAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders: Autoinflammatory DisordersB Cell BiologyCancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyComparative ImmunologyCytokines and Soluble Mediators in ImmunityImmunological MemoryImmunological Tolerance and RegulationInflammationMicrobial ImmunologyMolecular Innate ImmunityMucosal ImmunityMultiple Sclerosis and NeuroimmunologyNK and Innate Lymphoid Cell BiologyNutritional ImmunologyParasite ImmunologyPrimary ImmunodeficienciesSystems ImmunologyT Cell BiologyVaccines and Molecular TherapeuticsViral Immunology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Immunology Sections Sections Alloimmunity and TransplantationAntigen Presenting Cell BiologyAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders : Autoimmune DisordersAutoimmune and Autoinflammatory Disorders: Autoinflammatory DisordersB Cell BiologyCancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyComparative ImmunologyCytokines and Soluble Mediators in ImmunityImmunological MemoryImmunological Tolerance and RegulationInflammationMicrobial ImmunologyMolecular Innate ImmunityMucosal ImmunityMultiple Sclerosis and NeuroimmunologyNK and Innate Lymphoid Cell BiologyNutritional ImmunologyParasite ImmunologyPrimary ImmunodeficienciesSystems ImmunologyT Cell BiologyVaccines and Molecular TherapeuticsViral Immunology ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 1,9K Total views 1K Downloads 2 Citations Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by Guirong Wang Upstate Medical University, United States Reviewed by Penghua Wang UCONN Health, United States Feng Ruan Zhejiang University, China Table of contents AbstractIntroductionMaterials and methodsResultsDiscussionData availability statementEthics statementAuthor contributionsFundingAcknowledgmentsConflict of interestPublisher’s noteSupplementary materialReferences Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Immunol., 05 July 2023 Sec. Molecular Innate Immunity Volume 14 - 2023 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177624 RIG-I agonist SLR10 promotes macrophage M1 polarization during influenza virus infection Wenxin Wu1*Wei Zhang1Jeremy S. Alexandar1J. Leland Booth1Craig A. Miller2Chao Xu3Jordan P. Metcalf1,4,5*1Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States2Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oklahoma State University, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK, United States3Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States4Pulmonary Section, Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States5Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United StatesRationale: A family of short synthetic, triphosphorylated stem-loop RNAs (SLRs) have been designed to activate the retinoic-acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) pathway and induce a potent interferon (IFN) response, which may have therapeutic potential. We investigated immune response modulation by SLR10. We addressed whether RIG-I pathway activation with SLR10 leads to protection of nonsmoking (NS) and cigarette smoke (CS)-exposed mice after influenza A virus (IAV) infection.Methods: Mice were given 25 µg of SLR10 1 day before IAV infection. We compared the survival rates and host immune responses of NS and CS-exposed mice following challenge with IAV.Results: SLR10 significantly decreased weight loss and increased survival rates in both NS and CS-exposed mice during IAV infection. SLR10 administration repaired the impaired proinflammatory response in CS-exposed mice without causing more lung injury in NS mice as assessed by physiologic measurements. Although histopathologic study revealed that SLR10 administration was likely to result in higher pathological scores than untreated groups in both NS and CS mice, this change was not enough to increase lung injury evaluated by lung-to-body weight ratio. Both qRT-PCR on lung tissues and multiplex immunoassay on bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALFs) showed that most IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines were expressed at lower levels in SLR10-treated NS mice than control-treaded NS mice at day 5 post infection (p.i.). Remarkably, proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-12, and GM-CSF were increased in CS-exposed mice by SLR10 at day 5 p.i. Significantly, SLR10 elevated the ratio of the two chemokines (CXCL9 and CCL17) in BALFs, suggesting macrophages were polarized to classically activated (M1) status. In vitro testing also found that SLR10 not only stimulated human alveolar macrophage polarization to an M1 phenotype, but also reversed cigarette smoke extract (CSE)-induced M2 to M1 polarization.Conclusions: Our data show that SLR10 administration in mice is protective for both NS and CS-exposed IAV-infected mice. Mechanistically, SLR10 treatment promoted M1 macrophage polarization in the lung during influenza infection. The protective effects by SLR10 may be a promising intervention for therapy for infections with viruses, particularly those with CS-enhanced susceptibility to adverse outcomes.IntroductionThe innate immune system provides immediate protection against infection by recognizing and responding to pathogens in a non-specific manner. The innate responses to influenza A virus (IAV) are initiated by recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by host’s pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), such as retinoic acid-inducible protein I (RIG-I) (1) and Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Cigarette smoke (CS) increases the risk of influenza hospitalization and reduces flu vaccine efficiency in older people (2), yet the mechanisms are not fully understood. CS suppresses host antiviral defense in the immune system (3–5). We have shown that CS exposure decreased the survival rates in wild type (WT) mice infected with IAV. The increased mortality was associated with a suppressed innate immune response in the lungs (6).Macrophages are essential components of innate immunity and are commonly involved in viral infections and antiviral states. In the case of IAV, animal studies showed that macrophage depletion results in increased viral replication, with higher lung inflammation responses and increased mortality (7–9). During pathogenic infection, macrophages demonstrated plasticity via activation into two polarized phenotypes, classically activated (M1) and alternatively activated (M2) macrophages (10). The M1 macrophages are mainly polarized by T helper type 1 (Th1) cytokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IL-6, IL-1β, and IL-12. In comparison, M2 macrophages are polarized by IL-13, IL-4, macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), and glucocorticoids and serotonin (10). Functionally, M1 macrophages exhibit microbicidal activity and M2 macrophages facilitate clearance of parasites, enhance tissue repair, and promote wound healing. Once polarized, M1 or M2 macrophages secrete a series of cytokines to stimulate or suppress inflammatory responses (11). M1 macrophages have an elevated ability to release proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-12, and chemokines such as interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (IP-10) and CXCL9. Conversely, M2 macrophages release anti-inflammatory cytokines, like IL-10 and TGFβ, and chemokines CCL17, CCL22, and CCL24. In terms of metabolic status, M1 macrophages produce inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) enzyme to catalyze L-arginine to reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI), which promote the killing of pathogens. On the contrary, M2 macrophages stimulate arginase I (Arg I) enzyme to catalyze L-arginine into ornithine and polyamines that support tissue remodeling and fibrosis (11).Immune response modulation is a potential therapeutic intervention. Many synthetic RIG-I agonists that activate antiviral defense have been tested as probes, used to delineate mechanisms, and tested as pharmacological agents to combat IAV infection (12–14). A family of short synthetic, triphosphorylated stem-loop RNAs (SLRs) have been designed to activate the RIG-I pathway and induce a potent interferon (IFN) response (15). With a stable RNA tetraloop blocking the opposite end of the SLR duplex, RIG-I is guaranteed to bind the SLR triphosphorylated duplex terminus. They offer useful resources for examining the mechanism that causes RIG-I activation. Early studies are promising as one of the molecules, SLR14, demonstrated remarkable prophylactic protective capacity against lethal severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS−CoV−2) infection in a mouse model (16).In this report, we chose to study a similar molecule, SLR10, which has been demonstrated to be a highly potent activator of the IFN response in mice (15). We tracked the lung innate immune response to IAV infection in nonsmoking (NS) and CS-exposed mice after SLR10 administration. We addressed whether RIG-I pathway activation with SLR10 leads to protection of NS and CS-exposed mice after IAV infection.Materials and methodsEthics statementThe animal study was reviewed and approved by The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (protocol number: 17-106-HI). The facility where this research was conducted is accredited by AAALAC.Influenza A virusThe IAV strain used in this study was A/PR/34/8 (PR8). The stocks were propagated in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK, ATCC, Manassas, VA) cells following standard procedures (17). The virus was titered by plaque assay in MDCK cells, aliquoted, and stored at −80°C.Whole-body CS exposure, SLR10 administration, and influenza virus infectionUnrestrained C57BL/6 mice were subjected to whole-body exposure of the smoke from 1R6F reference cigarettes (University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY) for 4 hours per day for 6 weeks, as previously described (4).SLR10 was obtained from the Anna Pyle lab in Yale University. Mice under SLR10 administration and IAV infection were anaesthetized by isoflurane inhalation. The mice were treated with SLR10 (~1.1mg/kg) intratracheally in complex with in vivo-JetPEI (PolyPlus, France) in a 50-µl volume 1 day prior to infection with A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) mouse-adapted IAV. The negative control group was injected with the same amount in vivo-JetPEI only or pppNS in in vivo-JetPEI. The mice were held in a vertical position while sedated and administered by intranasal instillation of virus diluted in PBS (50 µl solution). An equal volume of PBS without virus was sham inoculated to the mock group. The animals were meticulously watched both during and after each procedure to make sure they recovered properly. Mice were monitored daily for 15 days for clinical symptoms (shaking, inactivity, and piloerection) and their weight was recorded daily.Collection of primary human bronchial epithelial cells and human alveolar macrophagesAccording to a procedure authorized by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (IRB # 2197), human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) were collected by bronchoscopy and bronchial brushing from healthy, non-smoking adult volunteers, as previously described (18). Whole human donor lungs were obtained through the International Institute for the Advancement of Medicine (Edison, NJ), a nonprofit division of the Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation, or from LifeShare, a nonprofit organ procurement organization in Oklahoma City, OK. Human alveolar macrophages were isolated from the lungs as previously described (19).SLR10 transfection into cellsSLR10 was diluted in 250 μl Opti-MEM Reduced Serum Medium without serum and combined with an equal volume of a 2% solution of Lipofectamine in Opti-MEM after a short incubation of both solutions at room temperature. Then, after an additional 20 minutes of incubation, SLR10-Lipofectamine 2000 complexes were added to wells containing cells and medium with SLR final concentration at 5 µg/ml. The cells were then incubated for 37°C in a CO2 incubator prior to harvest.Multiplex immunoassayUsing multiplex immunoassay, the cytokine protein levels in mouse bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALF) were assessed (Eve Technologies, Calgary, AB, Canada). For disinfection, each sample was diluted two-fold in 1% triton X-100 (final).Measurement of mRNA expression by quantitative real-time PCRA modified TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) procedure was used to extract and quantify the total RNA from the lung. The electrophoresis of formaldehyde on agarose gel was used to confirm the integrity of the RNA. Using the oligo (dT) SuperScript II First-Strand Synthesis System for RT-PCR, equal amounts (1µg) of RNA from each sample were reverse-transcribed into cDNA (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Gene specific primers’ sequences are shown in Table 1. Additional primers’ sequences were those used in our prior publication (6). qRT-PCR was carried out on a Bio-Rad CFX96TM Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System using 100 ng sample RNA and SYBR Green (Quanta Biosciences, Gaithersburg, MD). The target gene’s ΔCT value and its normalizer, β-actin, were used to calculate and plot the results.TABLE 1 Table 1 List of primers used in RT-PCR.Histological analysis of mouse lungMice were killed five days after the IAV infection, and the lungs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 24 hours at room temperature before being embedded in paraffin. Hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining was performed on fixed tissue to evaluate fibrosis and inflammation. Lung tissues were histologically evaluated for alveolar damage (e.g. pneumocyte necrosis or hyaline membrane formation), serous exudate/edema, peribronchial inflammation, alveolar fibrin deposition, alveolar and interstitial inflammatory infiltrates, perivascular infiltrates, perivascular edema, and hemorrhage. All tissues were assigned a quantitative histopathological score based on previously documented criteria (20, 21): 0 = no apparent pathology/change; 1 = minimal change (minimally increased numbers of inflammatory cells); 2 = mild change (mild inflammatory infiltrates, alveolar damageecrosis, fibrin deposition, and/or exudation); 3 = moderate change (as previously described, but moderately more extensive); and 4 = marked changes (as previously described, but with severe inflammation, alveolar damage, hyaline membrane formation, necrosis, exudation, or hemorrhage). To eliminate bias and ensure scientific rigor, all tissues were evaluated and scored by a board-certified veterinary pathologist who was blinded to the study groups.Statistical analysisStatistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. The logrank test was used to determine the significance of the survival rate. The p value for RT-PCR results was calculated using the ΔCt values from different experimental groups. Significance was considered as p < 0.05.ResultsSLR10 administration induced innate immune responses in human primary bronchial epithelial cells and in miceFirst, we confirmed that SLR10 activates RIG-I and cytokine responses using HBECs. Cells were stimulated by SLR10 and IAV PR8 infection was served as a positive control. We also included two negative controls, OH-SLR10 (RNA stemloops lacking 5’-phosphatemoieties) and ppp-NS (a 5’-triphosphorylated single-stranded RNA that is the same length as SLR10 but nonstructural). Similar to PR8 infection, SLR10 significantly increased mRNA levels of RIG-I and the downstream transcription factor IRF7 in these cells. In addition, mRNA levels of RIG-I induced IFN-β and IP-10 were increased 400 and 2000-fold over mock, respectively (Figure 1A). In addition, SLR10 induced IP-10 was 11-fold higher than virus induced IP-10. By contract, there was no RIG-I and cytokine induction in OH-SLR10 and ppp-NS control-treated cells. Thus, SLR10 is a highly potent activator of RIG-I and IFN in vitro in human airway epithelium.FIGURE 1 Figure 1 SLR10 administration induced robust RIG-I initiated innate immune responses in HBECs and mouse lung. (A) Cells were stimulated by 5 µg/ml of SLR10. IAV PR8 infection served as a positive control. OH-SLR10 and ppp-NS served as negative controls. Cells were collected at 6 h after SLR10 stimulation or 24 h after PR8 infection. (B) C57BL/6 mice were administrated with 1.1 mg/kg of SLR10 with in vivo-JET PEI mixture by four administration routes, intravenously (i.v.), intraperitoneally (i.p.), intranasally (i.n.), and intratracheally (i.t.). After 24 h, mouse lungs were collected. mRNA levels were assessed by qRT-PCR and normalized to β-actin. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. *denotes significant difference between the noted group and mock group, p<0.05. Bar graph represents mean ± standard error (n=4).We used a proven RNA delivery technique to inject RNA ligands into living animals in order to test SLR10’s capacity to activate the RIG-I pathway in mouse lungs. We compared four administration routes, namely intravenously (i.v.), intraperitoneally (i.p.), intranasally (i.n.), and intratracheally (i.t.), in wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice. Lungs were collected 24 h after administration of a complex of RNA ligands and polyethylenimine (JetPEI). SLR10 administration induced innate immune responses in these animals (Figure 1B). We found that i.t. administration showed durable mRNA induction of RIG-I, IP-10, IFN-β, and IFN-λ2/3 in the lung at 24 h after SLR10 treatment. In contrast, i.p. administration demonstrated the lowest relative mRNA expression of antiviral genes of the routes tested. Therefore, i.t. administration is the most effective way to induce enduring innate immune responses in the mouse lung. We exclusively used this method in the following experiments.Mice were given 1.1 mg/kg of SLR10/JetPEI 1 day prior to IAV infection to test whether SLR10 administration improves survival in NS mice. (Figure 2A). The negative control group was injected with the same amount in vivo-JetPEI vehicle only. IAV-infected animals were inoculated with a lethal dose of virus (1000 PFU), which is a LD50 dose in NS mice (causing approximately 50% mortality). Survival and weight loss were monitored over the course of 15 days. When mice died in the cage or reached 70% of their original body weight, their deaths were recorded. JetPEI/PBS vehicle administration plus sham inoculation (NS vehicle group) in mice caused an adverse effect in these animals, evidenced by initial weight loss of all mice in this group and death of one animal. Despite that, SLR10 administration significantly decreased overall mortality in NS mice during IAV infection as assessed by logrank test (Figure 2B). Specifically, SLR10-treated mice had better survival (NS SLR10+PR8, 67%) compared to untreated animals (NS vehicle+PR8, 0%). The body weight data correlated with mortality data in that lower survival groups lost more weight than higher survival groups. Of note, the maximum body weight loss of SLR10 treated group infected with IAV (21% loss) was significantly less than in the IAV-infected untreated group (26% loss; Figure 2C). The survival rate of NS PR8 is 33% and NS vehicle+PR8 is 0%. So, NS vehicle+PR8 group had 33% less survival rate compared to NS PR8. The difference with or without vehicle is wider than NS vehicle only, which had a survival rate of 86%. Thus, we suspect that vehicle plus PR8 might have synergized negative effects on mouse survival rate. Despite the negative effect of vehicle+PR8, SLR10 (in vehicle)+PR8 mice still have a significantly better survival rate than vehicle+PR8 group. The result further demonstrated that SLR10 not only helped protect against IAV induced mortality but the effect was so beneficial that it negated or overcame the negative effects of the synergized negative effects of vehicle+PR8.FIGURE 2 Figure 2 SLR10 administration increased survival rates of both NS and CS-exposed mice in lethal IAV infection. (A) Schematic of the experimental plan of SLR10 administration and IAV infection in NS and CS mice. CS mice were exposed to CS for 6 weeks. For SLR10 treatment groups, the mice were treated with 1.1 mg/kg of SLR10/in vivo-JET PEI intratracheally 1 day before IAV infection. The mice were intranasally inoculated with IAV at 1000 PFU/mouse. Mortality and body weight were monitored daily. Body weight data were normalized to each mouse’s starting body weight. Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation [n≥9 for all groups except NS vehicle (n=7)]. Mortality (B) and body weight (C) during lethal IAV infection in SLR10 administrated NS mice. #denotes significant survival rate difference between the NS SLR10+PR8 and NS vehicle+PR8 groups, p<0.05. *denotes significant weight loss difference between the NS SLR10+PR8 and NS vehicle+PR8 groups, p<0.05. Mortality (D) and body weight (E) during lethal IAV infection in SLR10 administrated CS mice. The logrank test was used to determine the significance of the survival rate. #denotes significant survival rate difference between the CS SLR10+PR8 and CS PR8 groups, p<0.05. *denotes significant weight loss difference between the CS SLR10+PR8 and CS PR8 groups, p<0.05.Following that, we examined whether SLR10 administration affected mortality and weight loss during IAV infection in CS-exposed mice. Whole-body CS exposure was performed as described (4). Unrestrained mice were subjected to 6 weeks of CS exposure for 4 hours per day in a whole-body cigarette smoking chamber system (Teague Enterprises, Davis, CA). Some of the mice were given SLR10 intratracheally after a 6-week CS exposure. The mice were then all given a lethal dose of the PR8 virus (Figure 2D). As previously demonstrated, CS exposure increased the morbidity and mortality of IAV infection in mice (6, 22). In Figure 2D, after IAV infection (1000 PFU/mouse), the infection caused death in all CS-exposed mice (0% survival for CS mice). However, SLR10 administration to CS-exposed mice improved survival rate during IAV infection (80% survival for CS SLR10+PR8 group vs.. 0% for CS PR8 group, p<0.05 by Logrank test). Morbidity was also decreased by SLR10 treatment (Figure 2E), as treated mice had less weight loss compared with diluent treated mice (21% loss for CS SLR10+PR8 group vs. 29% loss for CS PR8 group, p<0.05; Figure 2E). Thus, SLR10 significantly decreased weight loss and improved survival in both NS and CS-exposed mice during IAV infection.SLR10 restored inflammatory responses in CS-exposed mice but did not increase lung injury in NS mice during IAV infectionMice were intranasally inoculated with IAV at 500 PFU/mouse to test the effect of SLR10 on the inflammatory response to IAV. At 5 days p.i., animals were sacrificed by an isoflurane overdose. The total number of inflammatory cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALF)was first determined. IAV infection increased the total viable leukocytes in BALF in mice, as expected (Figure 3A; NS mock vs.. NS PR8). As previously demonstrated (6), CS exposure reduced the total BALF cell number during IAV infection (CS PR8 vs. NS PR8). SLR10 administration to CS mice (CS PR8+SLR10), on the other hand, significantly increased total BALF cell numbers compared to CS PR8 mice (Figure 3A). These results showed that SLR10 increased immune cell influx into the lung in CS-exposed mice. These results showed that SLR10 increased immune cell influx into the lung in CS-exposed mice back to levels seen in NS mice during IAV infection (NS PR8 vs. CS PR8+SLR10). The restored inflammation in the lung was also confirmed by the total amount of protein in the BALF, which also showed that the CS PR8+SLR10 group had much more protein than the CS PR8 group (Figure 3C).FIGURE 3 Figure 3 Lung injury and cellularity in the lungs. CS exposure, SLR10 administration, and IAV infection are the same as in Figure 2A. Each mouse was infected with 500 PFU of IAV. Mock-treated mice were inoculated with PBS. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) or lung tissue was harvested at day 5 after infection. Total immune cells (A), total protein concentration (C) in BALF, and ratio of lung/body weight (B) were determined. Data are expressed as means ± SEM (n≥4/group). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. *denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. ND, no significant difference between the two groups.The lung-to-body weight ratio is an important predictor of lung injury. Mice infected with IAV had a significantly higher lung-to-body weight ratio (Figure 3B; NS vs. Mock). SLR10 treatment to NS mice did not significantly change the ratio over that seen in the untreated group (NS PR8+SLR10 vs. NS PR8). Meanwhile, SLR10 administration to CS-exposed mice did not cause more lung injury than in untreated CS mice during IAV infection (Figure 3B; CS PR8+SLR10 vs. CS PR8). Thus, SLR10 specifically restored inflammatory cell recruitment in the lungs of CS-exposed IAV infected mice (Figure 3A) but did not lead to enhanced lung injury compared to untreated NS and CS mice (Figure 3B) during IAV infection. This occurred despite more protein in BALF in the SLR10-treated IAV infected CS mice than in untreated IAV-infected CS mice (Figure 3C).Effect of SLR10 on lung histopathology during IAV infectionLung tissues were evaluated for histopathological changes. As shown in Figure 4, the lungs of healthy, mock-infected mice with CS (CS Mock) and without CS (NS Mock) were histologically normal. Both groups of IAV-infected mice (NS PR8 and CS PR8) exhibited similar histopathologic lesions characterized predominately by multifocal areas of bronchiolar inflammation accompanied by accumulations of inflammatory infiltrates within adjacent alveolar spaces. Moderate edema and moderate-to-large numbers of small lymphocytes and plasma cells frequently expanded the perivascular space surrounding numerous small and large caliber vessels. Treatment with SLR10 seemed to increase the severity of pathologic lesions in both CS (CS SLR10 PR8) and NS (NS SLR10 PR8) mice, though it did not reach statistical significance, and it may reflect enhanced inflammatory recruitment. SLR10-treated and untreated mice in both CS exposure groups exhibited evidence of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD), characterized by bronchial epithelium necrosis and ulceration with occasional hyaline membrane formation. The alveoli in all infected mice were frequently filled with large amounts of fibrin admixed with inflammatory cells (neutrophils and macrophages), hemorrhage, and edema. The interstitial space surrounding pulmonary vessels was frequently expanded by perivascular edema and lymphocytic infiltrates. No significant differences in histologic score were observed for any group based on the presence/absence of CS (for example NS PR8 vs. CS PR8). Thus, SLR10 appeared to result in higher overall inflammatory scores than untreated groups in both NS and CS mice at 5 days following infection (Figure 4G).FIGURE 4 Figure 4 Effect of SLR10 on pulmonary histopathology during IAV infection in NS and CS-exposed mice. CS exposure, SLR10 administration, and IAV infection are the same as in Figure 2A. Each mouse was infected with 500 PFU of IAV. Mock-treated mice were inoculated with PBS. Animals were sacrificed at 5 days after infection and lung tissue was harvested. Lung tissue sections prepared from the infected mice were fixed, processed, and stained with hematoxylin–eosin (A-F). Histopathologic evaluation and scoring of IAV infection were determined by a blinded pathologist (G). Compared to the open alveolar spaces in healthy lungs of uninfected of mice with no CS (A), NS Mock), the lungs of mice with IAV infection (B), NS PR8) contained bronchiolar inflammatory infiltrates (blue arrows) that frequently spilled over into the adjacent alveolar spaces (arrowheads). The interstitial space surrounding small and large caliber vessels was also expanded by perivascular edema and lymphocytic infiltrates (white stars). Lesions in the lungs of IAV-infected mice treated with SLR10 (C), NS SLR10 PR8) were more severe and featured distinct evidence of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) characterized by denuded bronchial epithelium (asterisks), alveolar inflammatory infiltrates (arrowheads), and marked intra-alveolar fibrin (arrows). The lungs of healthy, uninfected mice subjected to CS (D), CS Mock) were also histologically normal, with open bronchi/alveoli and minimal alveolar edema. Pulmonary lesions in IAV-infected mice (E), CS PR8) subjected to CS were less severe than in mice without smoke (B), NS IAV), although features such as alveolar inflammation (arrowheads), peribronchiolar infiltrates (blue arrows), and perivascular inflammation and edema (white stars) were readily observed. Similar to (C) the lungs of IAV-infected mice treated with SLR10 and subjected to CS (F), CS SLR10 PR8) exhibited widespread alveolar damage with hyaline membrane formation (asterisks), as well as alveolar inflammatory infiltrates (arrowheads), and marked intra-alveolar fibrin (arrows). Scale bar = 50 µM (20X). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. *denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. The image shown is representative of five mice lungs from each group.SLR10 administration to mice promoted M1 macrophage polarization in the lung during influenza infectionTo characterize cytokine induction during infection in all groups, we examined cytokine protein levels in BALF using multiplex immunoassay (Figure 5). For IFNs, CS exposure suppressed IFN-α, IFN-β, and IFN-γ induction by IAV relative to that observed in NS mice (CS PR8 vs. NS PR8, Supplemental Figure 1). Interestingly, we did not see enhanced IFN induction in SLR10-treated mice at this time point post-infection (p.i.). We also examined effects of CS and SLR10 on proinflammatory cytokine induction by IAV. IL-6 and GM-CSF induction by virus was significantly suppressed by CS exposure, as we have previously demonstrated. Remarkably, proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and GM-CSF in response to IAV were enhanced in the CS SLR10 group (Figure 5A). IL-12 levels also appeared to be increased in CS SLR10 mice although this did not reach statistical significance. In the case of anti-inflammatory cytokines, IAV infection did not increase IL-4 or IL-10 protein levels in either NS or CS mice (Figure 5B). Their levels seemed to be enhanced in CS SLR10 mice infected with IAV, but this did not reach statistical significance. Thus, in CS-exposed mice, SLR10 clearly increased proinflammatory cytokine production and did not significantly increase anti-inflammatory cytokine production in these animals.FIGURE 5 Figure 5 SLR10 administration to IAV-infected CS-exposed mice increased proinflammatory cytokine levels in BALF. CS exposure, SLR10 administration, and IAV infection are the same as in Figure 2A. Mice were infected with 500 PFU of IAV. BALF were harvested at day 5 post infection. Mock-treated mice were inoculated with PBS. Cytokine protein levels were determined by multiplex immunoassay. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. * denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. ND, no significant difference between the two groups.Next, we examined lung tissues in mice 5 days p.i. and determined mRNA levels of PRRs and corresponding downstream cytokines by qRT-PCR. CS-exposed mice had suppressed RIG-I and TLR3 induction by IAV compared NS mice (Figure 6A; CS PR8 vs. NS PR8), as we have previously demonstrated (6, 22). SLR10 administration did not change RIG-I and TLR3 mRNA induction by virus infection in the lungs of CS mice (Figure 6A; CS SLR10 PR8 vs. CS PR8). In terms of viral RNA expression, all IAV-infected groups had similar IAV M protein mRNA expression showing similar viral tissue burden; however, the CS PR8 group, surprisingly, had lower M protein replication than other infected groups. This is consistent with our previous publication (6) that there was no direct correlation of mortality with lung viral burden (Figure 6A last panel). GM-CSF mRNA levels were higher in SLR10-treated groups regardless of CS exposure (Figure 6B). However, we did not find that IL-6 mRNA in CS SLR10 PR8 was higher than the CS PR8 group. Therefore, we did not find significant changes related to inflammation except for GM-CSF in whole lung tissue which mainly represents epithelial cell gene expression.FIGURE 6 Figure 6 Innate immune responses to influenza infection in mouse lung. CS exposure, SLR10 administration, and IAV infection are the same as in Figure 2A. Mice were infected with 500 PFU of IAV. The mice were sacrificed at day 5 p.i. and (A) RIG-I, TLR3, and IAV M protein gene (B) cytokine IL-6, IFN-β, IL-1β, and GM-CSF mRNA levels in the lungs were assessed by qRT-PCR and normalized by β-actin levels. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n =5). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. * denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. ND, no significant difference between the two groups.Since GM-CSF, IL-6, and IL-12 cytokines are associated with M1 macrophages, we suspected that altered alveolar macrophage polarization may be responsible for the changes seen both in CS exposure and in SLR10-treated groups. We next measured chemokines CXCL9 and CCL17 protein levels in BALF by ELISA. These two cytokines are important markers for M1 and M2 macrophage polarization, respectively. CXCL9 was significantly induced by SLR10 even in CS-exposed mice (CS PR8+SLR10; Figure 7A). Meanwhile, CCL17 levels were lower in SLR10-treated groups compared to corresponding NS PR8 and CS PR8 groups (Figure 7B). We also examined the ratio of chemokine CXCL9 vs. chemokine CCL17, which is an intrinsic property that reveals M1 vs. M2 macrophage polarization (23). As expected, PR8 infection significantly increased the M1:M2 ratio in NS mice, indicating an M1 dominant profile during IAV infection (Figure 7C). CS exposure caused a shift towards M2 status in these animals (CS PR8 vs. NS PR8). Notably, SLR10 significantly increased the M1:M2 ratio in IAV-infected NS and CS mice (Figure 7C). Therefore, these results demonstrated CS favored M2 polarization during IAV infection while SLR10 administration to mice promoted alveolar macrophage polarization to an M1 phenotype.FIGURE 7 Figure 7 CXCL9:CCL17 ratio in BALF indicated an M1 macrophage polarization state directed by SLR10. CS exposure, SLR10 administration, and IAV infection are the same as in Figure 2A. Mice were infected with 500 PFU of IAV. BALF were harvested at day 5 p.i. Mock-treated mice were inoculated with PBS. Cytokine CXCL9 (A) and CCL17 (B) protein levels were determined by multiplex immunoassay and CXCL9:CCL17 ratios in BALF were calculated (C). Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. *denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. ND, no significant difference.SLR10 stimulated human alveolar macrophage polarization to M1 phenotype in vitroWe have shown earlier that alveolar macrophages accounted for 95% of total BAL cells in uninfected mice and 55% in IAV-infected mice (6). We examined if SLR10 stimulation directed human alveolar macrophages to M1 macrophage polarization in vitro. The procedure should mimic what happens in the alveolar space in mouse lung after SLR10 administration intratracheally. Human alveolar macrophages were stimulated by SLR10 for 24 h. SLR10 significantly increased mRNA expression of M1 macrophage related proteins, such as iNOS, CXCL9, IP-10, and IL-6 (Figure 8A). In contrast, cigarette smoke extract (CSE) treatment induced expression of the M2 markers CCL18 and CD206 (Figure 8B), and to a much lesser extent, induced the M1 markers iNOS and CXCL9 (Figure 8A). However, the magnitude of mRNA induction by CSE for M2 markers was generally 10-100 fold higher than for the M1 markers. So, although CSE induced both M1 and M2 marker expression, the overall effect was to significantly drive macrophage polarization toward the M2 state. In a similar but opposite manner, though SLR10 did not reduce the mRNA expression of M2 markers, it stimulated expression of the M1 markers IP-10 and IL-6, resulting in a shift toward M1 polarization, even in CSE-treated macrophages. Thus, SLR10 not only stimulated human alveolar macrophage to M1 polarization, but it also reversed M2 polarization induced by CSE to M1 macrophage.FIGURE 8 Figure 8 SLR10 induced human alveolar macrophages to an M1 polarization state even in CSE-treated cells. human alveolar macrophages were stimulated by 5 µg/ml of SLR10/Lipofectamine 2000. Transfection reagent only was used as a negative control. Cells were collected at 24 h after SLR10 stimulation. For CSE treatment, cells were incubated in media containing 5% CSE for 24 h. mRNA levels of (A) M1 macrophage markers and (B) M2 macrophage markers were assessed by qRT-PCR and normalized to β-actin. The data were presented as fold changes over mock. Bar graphs represents mean ± standard error (n=3). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA with Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc correction for multiple comparisons. *denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. ND, no significant difference between the two groups.DiscussionIn this study, using a mouse model and a primary human cell culture model, we showed that SLR10 induced innate immune responses in vivo and in vitro. SLR10 significantly improved mortality in smoking mice during IAV infection by restoring the impaired proinflammatory response without causing additional lung injury. While CS exposure drove macrophages towards an M2 phenotype, SLR10 elevated the ratio of CXCL9: CCL17 in BALF, suggesting it polarized macrophages to classically activated M1 phenotypes. Using a human alveolar macrophage model, we found that SLR10 not only directed human alveolar macrophages to M1 phenotypes, but it also reversed CSE-induced M2 to M1 macrophage polarization. Our result was based on both mRNA levels (Figures 6, 8) and protein levels (Figures 5, 7). We used multiplex immunoassay and ELISA to detect protein levels in BALF, which is a direct way to monitor cytokine and chemokine changes in the lung.SLR molecules are a set of stem-loop RNA that present a single duplex terminus and therefore bind to the RIG-I molecule, which mimic virus detection and activates the RIG-I pathway. Our result is consistent with an earlier report that showed RIG-I like receptors (RLRs) drive a signature of macrophage M1 polarization during West Nile virus (WNV) infection (24). In that report, the authors showed that the RLRs promote differential immune gene activation and response polarization to promote an M1/inflammatory signature while suppressing the M2/wound healing phenotype, using genome-wide RNA-seq and bioinformatics investigations of macrophages from mice. RIG-I activation during acute WNV infection leads peripheral monocytes and tissue-resident macrophages into an M1 phenotype through parallel regulation of ATF4/SMAD4 with canonical STAT signaling to mediate M1 gene induction and M2 gene suppression. Also, it has been reported that RIG-I signaling pathway activation by myoglobin promotes macrophage polarization to M1 type (25). Another whole-transcriptome analysis of human macrophages revealed that genes in significantly enriched pathways in response to IAV infection were specifically correlated with M1 macrophage subtype, and markedly up-regulated expression of RLR signaling pathway genes (26). It has been shown that CS promotes M2 polarization of macrophages (27) and nicotine causes immunosuppression via directing M2 polarization of macrophages (28). M2 macrophages are more vulnerable to IAV infection (29), have impaired phagocytic capacity (30), and induce less CD8+ T-cell response (31, 32). In our mouse model, CS polarized macrophages to an M2-like state, which is vulnerable to IAV infection. In our CSE-treated primary human alveolar macrophage model, CSE stimulated both M1 and M2 marker expression in these cells with disproportionate elevation of M2 markers. SLR10 stimulation increased M1 inflammatory responses and did not change M2; therefore, it reversed the macrophages to an M1 dominant phenotype, which are more protective in CS-exposed mice during IAV infection. Although SLR10 appeared to result in higher histopathological scores than untreated groups due to M1 polarization at 5 days following infection, mortality in the SLR10-treated groups was decreased. This is consistent with a prior study showing that intranasal pretreatment with Poly(I:C), a RIG-I and TLR3 agonist, accelerates inflammatory cell infiltration into lungs and protects aged mice from lethal IAV infections (33). Poly(I:C)-induced RIG-I pathway activation also inhibited vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and provoked type 2 inflammatory tissue remodeling and ameliorated adaptive T-helper 2 (Th2)-mediated inflammation (34). Although it has been shown that Poly(I:C) converted tumor-associated macrophages to M1 polarization in cancer studies (35, 36), our current report is the first to demonstrate that RIG-I pathway activation by agonists directs alveolar macrophages to M1 phenotypes and augments type 1 inflammatory responses during viral infection. It is also the first to demonstrate that RIG-I pathway activation reverses deleterious M2 polarization induced by CS prior to viral infection and improves outcomes. While we propose that M1 polarization in the presence of CSE is the primary beneficial effect of SLR-10 based on both in vivo mouse and in vitro human data, it is also possible that suppression of the M2 phenotype, while maintaining the M1 phenotype, is the mechanism that leads to a more favorable M1:M2 profile early during influenza infection.GM-CSF is a myeloid growth factor that promotes macrophage and dendritic cell proliferation and differentiation. In vitro, GM-CSF-treated macrophages have an “M1-like” phenotype, which have increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines (37). Furthermore, GM-CSF is thought to drive M1 polarization and to improve host defense functions and alveolar macrophage survival in vitro and in animal models in vivo (38, 39). In humans, inhaled GM-CSF promoted M1 polarization of alveolar macrophages and enhanced host defense without increasing neutrophil influx into the alveolar compartment (40). It has previously been shown that modulation of macrophage polarization by GM-CSF inhibited influenza infection (41). Our results showed that SLR10 administration increased GM-CSF mRNA and protein levels in the lung in both NS and CS mice. GM-CSF may play an important role in SLR10 mediated protection during lethal IAV infection.The mechanisms underlying the severity of IAV infection in smokers are still being debated, with conflicting reports of both augmented inflammatory responses (42–44) and decreased antiviral host-defense (5, 45). During influenza infection, inflammation can either have supportive antiviral effects or can contribute to immunopathology (46). In order to maximize viral clearance while causing minimal damage to host cells, proper induction of innate responses is critical. We have demonstrated earlier that innate immune responses are suppressed by CS exposure (3, 4). SLR10 administration to CS-exposed mice helps restore the CS-suppressed proinflammatory responses but does not cause deleterious excessive inflammation and injury in the lung. Combined with our recent report that early IFN-β administration to CS-exposed mice improved outcomes during IAV infection (22), the proper proinflammatory cytokine responses in the host evidently would decrease the mortality in smokers during acute viral infection, especially at the early stage of infection.Taken together, we conclude that SLR10 stimulation restored alveolar macrophage functions to their normal stressed responses, which increases inflammatory responses to IAV. This is especially critical for the CS-exposed host as this tends to shift macrophages into an M2-like phenotype. Thus, modulation of macrophage polarization by SLR10 might be a possible therapeutic strategy against IAV infection in smokers.Data availability statementThe original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary Material. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors.Ethics statementThe studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (IRB # 2197). The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study. The animal study was reviewed and approved by The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (protocol number: 17-106-HI).Author contributionsWW and JM generated the hypothesis, performed statistical analysis, and wrote the manuscript. WZ, JB, JA, CM, and CX acquired the data. WW, CM, and JM contributed to writing the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.FundingThe research described in this work was partially supported by Oklahoma Shared Clinical and Translational Resource (OSCTR) pilot grants, grant number U54GM104938 to WW, the Merit Review Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs, grant number I01 BX005023 to JM, and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences, grant number 5P20GM103648 to JM. This project utilized the Immunopathology Core of the Oklahoma Center for Respiratory and Infectious Diseases, supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number P20GM103648.AcknowledgmentsWe acknowledge the assistance from the OUHSC Rodent Barrier Facility. The OUHSC Rodent Barrier Facility was supported in part by Grant Number C06RR017598 from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the contents of this publication are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official view of NCRR or NIH. We want to thank Drs. Olga Fedorova and Anna Pyle at Yale University for providing us SLR10.Conflict of interestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s noteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.Supplementary materialThe Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177624/full#supplementary-materialSupplementary Figure 1 | Interferon levels in BALF in IAV-infected mice. CS exposure, SLR10 administration and IAV infection are the same as in Figure 2A. Mice were infected with 500 PFU of IAV. BALF were harvested at day 5 post infection. Mock treated mice were inoculated with PBS. Interferon protein levels were determined by multiplex immunoassay. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 4 per group). * denotes significant difference between the two groups, p<0.05. ND = no significant difference between the two groups.References 1. Thoresen D, Wang W, Galls D, Guo R, Xu L, Pyle AM. The molecular mechanism of RIG-I activation and signaling. Immunol Rev (2021) 304:154–68. doi: 10.1111/imr.13022PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 2. Godoy P, Castilla J, Soldevila N, Mayoral JM, Toledo D, Martín V, et al. Smoking may increase the risk of influenza hospitalization and reduce influenza vaccine effectiveness in the elderly. Eur J Public Health (2018) 28:150–5. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckx130PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 3. Wu W, Patel KB, Booth JL, Zhang W, Metcalf JP. Cigarette smoke extract suppresses the RIG-i-initiated innate immune response to influenza virus in the human lung. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2011) 300:L821–830. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00267.2010PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 4. Wu W, Zhang W, More S, Booth JL, Duggan ES, Liu L, et al. Cigarette smoke attenuates the RIG-i-initiated innate antiviral response to influenza infection in two murine models. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2014) 307:L848–858. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00158.2014PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 5. Duffney PF, Embong AK, McGuire CC, Thatcher TH, Phipps RP, Sime PJ. Cigarette smoke increases susceptibility to infection in lung epithelial cells by upregulating caveolin-dependent endocytosis. PloS One (2020) 15:e0232102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232102PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 6. Wang X, Wu W, Zhang W, Leland Booth J, Duggan ES, Tian L, et al. RIG-I overexpression decreases mortality of cigarette smoke exposed mice during influenza a virus infection. Respir Res (2017) 18:166. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0649-zPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 7. Tate MD, Pickett DL, van Rooijen N, Brooks AG, Reading PC. Critical role of airway macrophages in modulating disease severity during influenza virus infection of mice. J Virol (2010) 84:7569–80. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00291-10PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 8. Le VL, Courtney CL, Steel J, Compans RW. Closely related influenza viruses induce contrasting respiratory tract immunopathology. PloS One (2013) 8:e76708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076708PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 9. Schneider C, Nobs SP, Heer AK, Kurrer M, Klinke G, van Rooijen N, et al. Alveolar macrophages are essential for protection from respiratory failure and associated morbidity following influenza virus infection. PloS Pathog (2014) 10:e1004053. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004053PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 10. Sang Y, Miller LC, Blecha F. Macrophage polarization in virus-host interactions. J Clin Cell Immunol (2015) 6(2):311. doi: 10.4172/2155-9899.1000311PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 11. Biswas SK, Chittezhath M, Shalova IN, Lim J-Y. Macrophage polarization and plasticity in health and disease. Immunologic Res (2012) 53:11–24. doi: 10.1007/s12026-012-8291-9CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 12. Lin L, Liu Q, Berube N, Detmer S, Zhou Y. 5’-triphosphate-short interfering RNA: potent inhibition of influenza a virus infection by gene silencing and RIG-I activation. J Virol (2012) 86:10359–69. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00665-12PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 13. Chiang C, Beljanski V, Yin K, Olagnier D, Ben Yebdri F, Steel C, et al. Sequence-specific modifications enhance the broad-spectrum antiviral response activated by RIG-I agonists. J Virol (2015) 89:8011–25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00845-15PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 14. Kulkarni RR, Rasheed MA, Bhaumik SK, Ranjan P, Cao W, Davis C, et al. Activation of the RIG-I pathway during influenza vaccination enhances the germinal center reaction, promotes T follicular helper cell induction, and provides a dose-sparing effect and protective immunity. J Virol (2014) 88:13990–4001. doi: 10.1128/jvi.02273-14PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 15. Linehan MM, Dickey TH, Molinari ES, Fitzgerald ME, Potapova O, Iwasaki A, et al. A minimal RNA ligand for potent RIG-I activation in living mice. Sci Adv (2018) 4:e1701854. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1701854PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 16. Mao T, Israelow B, Lucas C, Vogels CBF, Gomez-Calvo ML, Fedorova O, et al. A stem-loop RNA RIG-I agonist protects against acute and chronic SARS-CoV-2 infection in mice. J Exp Med (2022) 219(1):e20211818. doi: 10.1084/jem.20211818PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 17. Wu W, Booth JL, Duggan ES, Wu S, Patel KB, Coggeshall KM, et al. Innate immune response to H3N2 and H1N1 influenza virus infection in a human lung organ culture model. Virology (2010) 396:178–88. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.10.016PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 18. Wu W, Zhang W, Booth JL, Hutchings DC, Wang X, White VL, et al. Human primary airway epithelial cells isolated from active smokers have epigenetically impaired antiviral responses. Respir Res (2016) 17:111. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0428-2PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 19. Patel VI, Booth JL, Duggan ES, Cate S, White VL, Hutchings D, et al. Transcriptional classification and functional characterization of human airway macrophage and dendritic cell subsets. J Immunol (2017) 198:1183–201. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600777PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 20. Rudd JM, Tamil Selvan M, Cowan S, Kao YF, Midkiff CC, Narayanan S, et al. Clinical and histopathologic features of a feline SARS-CoV-2 infection model are analogous to acute COVID-19 in humans. Viruses (2021) 13(8):1550. doi: 10.3390/v13081550PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 21. Xu T, Qiao J, Zhao L, He G, Li K, Wang J, et al. Effect of dexamethasone on acute respiratory distress syndrome induced by the H5N1 virus in mice. Eur Respir J (2009) 33:852–60. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00130507PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 22. Wu W, Tian L, Zhang W, Booth JL, Ritchey JW, Wu S, et al. Early IFN-β administration protects cigarette smoke exposed mice against lethal influenza virus infection without increasing lung inflammation. Sci Rep (2022) 12:4080. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-08066-7PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 23. Halstead ES, Umstead TM, Davies ML, Kawasawa YI, Silveyra P, Howyrlak J, et al. GM-CSF overexpression after influenza a virus infection prevents mortality and moderates M1-like airway monocyte/macrophage polarization. Respir Res (2018) 19:3. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0708-5PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 24. Stone AEL, Green R, Wilkins C, Hemann EA, Gale M Jr. RIG-i-like receptors direct inflammatory macrophage polarization against West Nile virus infection. Nat Commun (2019) 10:3649. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-11250-5PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 25. Li N, Chen J, Geng C, Wang X, Wang Y, Sun N, et al. Myoglobin promotes macrophage polarization to M1 type and pyroptosis via the RIG-I/Caspase1/GSDMD signaling pathway in CS-AKI. Cell Death Discov (2022) 8:90. doi: 10.1038/s41420-022-00894-wPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 26. Zhang N, Bao YJ, Tong AH, Zuyderduyn S, Bader GD, Malik Peiris JS, et al. Whole transcriptome analysis reveals differential gene expression profile reflecting macrophage polarization in response to influenza a H5N1 virus infection. BMC Med Genomics (2018) 11:20. doi: 10.1186/s12920-018-0335-0PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 27. Zhu Y, Zhang S, Sun J, Wang T, Liu Q, Wu G, et al. Cigarette smoke promotes oral leukoplakia via regulating glutamine metabolism and M2 polarization of macrophage. Int J Oral science (2021) 13:25. doi: 10.1038/s41368-021-00128-2CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 28. Saranyutanon S, Acharya S, Deshmukh SK, Khan MA, Singh S, Singh AP. Nicotine causes alternative polarization of macrophages via src-mediated STAT3 activation: potential pathobiological implications. J Cell Physiol (2022) 237:1486–97. doi: 10.1002/jcp.30607PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 29. Lauzon-Joset JF, Scott NM, Mincham KT, Stumbles PA, Holt PG, Strickland DH. Pregnancy induces a steady-state shift in alveolar macrophage M1/M2 phenotype that is associated with a heightened severity of influenza virus infection: mechanistic insight using mouse models. J Infect Dis (2019) 219:1823–31. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiy732PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 30. McGill J, Heusel JW, Legge KL. Innate immune control and regulation of influenza virus infections. J Leukoc Biol (2009) 86:803–12. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0509368PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 31. Osborne LC, Monticelli LA, Nice TJ, Sutherland TE, Siracusa MC, Hepworth MR, et al. Coinfection. virus-helminth coinfection reveals a microbiota-independent mechanism of immunomodulation. Science (2014) 345:578–82. doi: 10.1126/science.1256942PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 32. Wu W, Tian L, Zhang W, Booth JL, Ainsua-Enrich E, Kovats S, et al. Long-term cigarette smoke exposure dysregulates pulmonary T cell response and IFN-γ protection to influenza virus in mouse. Respir Res (2021) 22:112. doi: 10.1186/s12931-021-01713-zPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 33. Zhao J, Wohlford-Lenane C, Zhao J, Fleming E, Lane TE, McCray PB Jr., et al. Intranasal treatment with poly(I•C) protects aged mice from lethal respiratory virus infections. J Virol (2012) 86:11416–24. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01410-12PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 34. Ma B, Dela Cruz CS, Hartl D, Kang MJ, Takyar S, Homer RJ, et al. RIG-like helicase innate immunity inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor tissue responses via a type I IFN-dependent mechanism. Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2011) 183:1322–35. doi: 10.1164ccm.201008-1276OCPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 35. Shime H, Matsumoto M, Oshiumi H, Tanaka S, Nakane A, Iwakura Y, et al. Toll-like receptor 3 signaling converts tumor-supporting myeloid cells to tumoricidal effectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012) 109:2066–71. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1113099109PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 36. Dacoba TG, Anfray C, Mainini F, Allavena P, Alonso MJ, Torres Andón F, et al. Arginine-based Poly(I:C)-loaded nanocomplexes for the polarization of macrophages toward M1-antitumoral effectors. Front Immunol (2020) 11:1412. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01412PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 37. Fleetwood AJ, Lawrence T, Hamilton JA, Cook AD. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF) and macrophage CSF-dependent macrophage phenotypes display differences in cytokine profiles and transcription factor activities: implications for CSF blockade in inflammation. J Immunol (2007) 178:5245–52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.8.5245PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 38. Huang FF, Barnes PF, Feng Y, Donis R, Chroneos ZC, Idell S, et al. GM-CSF in the lung protects against lethal influenza infection. Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2011) 184:259–68. doi: 10.1164ccm.201012-2036OCPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 39. Krausgruber T, Blazek K, Smallie T, Alzabin S, Lockstone H, Sahgal N, et al. IRF5 promotes inflammatory macrophage polarization and TH1-TH17 responses. Nat Immunol (2011) 12:231–8. doi: 10.1038i.1990PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 40. Herold S, Hoegner K, Vadász I, Gessler T, Wilhelm J, Mayer K, et al. Inhaled granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor as treatment of pneumonia-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2014) 189:609–11. doi: 10.1164ccm.201311-2041LEPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 41. Sun Y, Liu Z, Liu D, Chen J, Gan F, Huang K. Low-level aflatoxin B1 promotes influenza infection and modulates a switch in macrophage polarization from M1 to M2. Cell Physiol biochemistry: Int J Exp Cell Physiology Biochemistry Pharmacol (2018) 49:1110–26. doi: 10.1159/000493294CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 42. Lee SW, Sharma L, Kang YA, Kim SH, Chandrasekharan S, Losier A, et al. Impact of cigarette smoke exposure on the lung fibroblastic response after influenza pneumonia. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2018) 59:770–81. doi: 10.1165cmb.2018-0004OCPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 43. Mebratu YA, Smith KR, Agga GE, Tesfaigzi Y. Inflammation and emphysema in cigarette smoke-exposed mice when instilled with poly (I:C) or infected with influenza a or respiratory syncytial viruses. Respir Res (2016) 17:75. doi: 10.1186/s12931-016-0392-xPubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 44. Gualano RC, Hansen MJ, Vlahos R, Jones JE, Park-Jones RA, Deliyannis G, et al. Cigarette smoke worsens lung inflammation and impairs resolution of influenza infection in mice. Respir Res (2008) 9:53. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-9-53PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 45. Bauer CMT, Morissette MC, Stämpfli MR. The influence of cigarette smoking on viral infections: translating bench science to impact COPD pathogenesis and acute exacerbations of COPD clinically. Chest (2013) 143:196–206. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-0930PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar 46. Lee AJ, Ashkar AA. The dual nature of type I and type II interferons. Front Immunol (2018) 9:2061. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02061PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google ScholarKeywords: influenza virus, RIG-I, agonist, SLR10, smoking, innate immunity, macrophage polarizationCitation: Wu W, Zhang W, Alexandar JS, Booth JL, Miller CA, Xu C and Metcalf JP (2023) RIG-I agonist SLR10 promotes macrophage M1 polarization during influenza virus infection. Front. Immunol. 14:1177624. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1177624Received: 01 March 2023; Accepted: 13 June 2023;Published: 05 July 2023.Edited by:Guirong Wang, Upstate Medical University, United StatesReviewed by:Feng Ruan, Zhejiang University, ChinaPenghua Wang, University of Connecticut Health Center, United StatesCopyright © 2023 Wu, Zhang, Alexandar, Booth, Miller, Xu and Metcalf. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.*Correspondence: Wenxin Wu, wenxin-wu@ouhsc.edu; Jordan P. Metcalf, jordan-metcalf@ouhsc.edu Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditionsAn immunostimulatory glycolipid that blocks SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza infections in vivo | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article An immunostimulatory glycolipid that blocks SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza infections in vivo Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 05 July 2023 An immunostimulatory glycolipid that blocks SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza infections in vivo Moriya Tsuji ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8587-277X1,2 na1, Manoj S. Nair ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5994-39571,2 na1, Kazuya Masuda ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3041-13051,2 na1, Candace Castagna3 na1, Zhenlu Chong4, Tamarand L. Darling4, Kuljeet Seehra4, Youngmin Hwang5, Ágata Lopes Ribeiro6, Geovane Marques Ferreira6, Laura Corredor3, Jordana Grazziela Alves Coelho-dos-Reis6, Yukiko Tsuji1, Munemasa Mori5, Adrianus C. M. Boon ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4700-82244,7,8, Michael S. Diamond ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8791-31654,7,8,9, Yaoxing Huang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6270-16441,2 & …David D. Ho ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1627-149X1,2,10 Show authors Nature Communications volume 14, Article number: 3959 (2023) Cite this article 6387 Accesses 12 Citations 35 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Molecular medicineTranslational immunologyViral host responseViral infection AbstractProphylactic vaccines for SARS-CoV-2 have lowered the incidence of severe COVID-19, but emergence of viral variants that are antigenically distinct from the vaccine strains are of concern and additional, broadly acting preventive approaches are desirable. Here, we report on a glycolipid termed 7DW8-5 that exploits the host innate immune system to enable rapid control of viral infections in vivo. This glycolipid binds to CD1d on antigen-presenting cells and thereby stimulates NKT cells to release a cascade of cytokines and chemokines. The intranasal administration of 7DW8-5 prior to virus exposure significantly blocked infection by three different authentic variants of SARS-CoV-2, as well as by respiratory syncytial virus and influenza virus, in mice or hamsters. We also found that this protective antiviral effect is both host-directed and mechanism-specific, requiring both the CD1d molecule and interferon-\(\gamma\). A chemical compound like 7DW8-5 that is easy to administer and cheap to manufacture may be useful not only in slowing the spread of COVID-19 but also in responding to future pandemics long before vaccines or drugs are developed. Similar content being viewed by others CoVac501, a self-adjuvanting peptide vaccine conjugated with TLR7 agonists, against SARS-CoV-2 induces protective immunity Article Open access 01 February 2022 First-in-class trispecific VHH-Fc based antibody with potent prophylactic and therapeutic efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 and variants Article Open access 09 March 2022 Intranasal trimeric sherpabody inhibits SARS-CoV-2 including recent immunoevasive Omicron subvariants Article Open access 24 March 2023 IntroductionAlthough the COVID-19 pandemic has devastated humanity for the past three years, the scientific response to develop and deploy countermeasures against the causative agent, SARS-CoV-2, has been truly unprecedented. In record time, antiviral drugs1,2 and monoclonal antibodies3,4 were added to the therapeutic arsenal. Likewise, many prophylactic vaccines were developed to harness the power of the adaptive immune response, with several shown to be highly protective against symptomatic infection5,6. However, as SARS-CoV-2 continued to spread and viral variants continued to evolve, vaccine-breakthrough infections have become a common occurrence, particularly after the emergence of the Omicron subvariants that are antigenically the most distinct from ancestral strains7,8. Novel prevention strategies could help to slow the transmission of this viral pathogen worldwide, including approaches that exploit the host innate immune system and enable rapid control of infection. For example, mice treated before, or soon after infection with a combination of inhaled Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2/6 and 9 agonists (Pam2-ODN) were shown to be broadly protective against microbial pathogens including respiratory viruses9. These agents induce activation of the antigen-presenting cells (APC) resulting in the downstream release of antiviral cytokines that mediate the clearance of the virus. Here, we evaluated a Natural killer T (NKT) cell-stimulatory agent for respiratory virus infections. NKT cells are a subset of lymphocytes possessing features of both natural killer (NK) cells and αβ T cells10,11. These cells form a key element of the innate immune response and may play a role not only in cancer12,13,14 and autoimmune diseases15, but also in protection against infections16,17,18,19. Some NKT cells possess a semi-invariant T-cell receptor (iTCR) and are thus called invariant NKT cells (iNKT cells), which recognize certain glycolipids bound to CD1d molecules on antigen-presenting cells (e.g., dendritic cells or DCs)20 and B cells21, thereby triggering a cascade of cytokines and chemokines10,11 (Fig. 1a). There have been a number of studies showing the importance of iNKT cells against viral infections, such as CMV, retroviral infection, RSV and influenza22,23,24,25,26, as well as the role of NKT cells in the context of adaptive anti-viral immune response27,28,29,30. The first CD1d ligand identified was a glycolipid termed α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer)31. Since then, there have been more than a dozen α-GalCer analogues being described to date14,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43, all of which are able to stimulate iNKT cells in the context of CD1d molecules, resulting in exerting activities against various infections, cancers and auto-immune diseases primarily in a mouse model. From a focused library of synthetic glycolipids, we have discovered an α-GalCer analog, 7DW8-5 (Fig. 1a), which also stimulates iNKT cells in the context of CD1d, but exhibits even more potent immunostimulatory activity in both mouse and human iNKT cells in vitro44. Upon stimulation, iNKT cells not only secrete Th1 cytokines that have known antiviral effects24,25,45, but also activate populations of NK cells and CD8+ T cells14,46,47. Each of these activated cell populations could release multiple cytokines, including interferon-γ (IFN-γ) that has known protective effects against several viral infections30,48,49.Fig. 1: 7DW8-5 blocks SARS-CoV-2 MA10 (50,000 PFU) infection in BALB/c mice.a Schematic showing the interaction between iNKT cells that carry iTCR and dendritic cells (DC) bearing CD1d that is bound to the glycolipid 7DW8-5 created using BioRender. Solid protection against infection, as manifested by maintenance of body weight and reduction of viral load (as determined by end-point dilution cultures) in lung tissues on Day 3 after virus challenge (d3) IN (intranasal), conferred by 7DW8-5 administered at (b) 2 µg IV (intravenous) or IN 2 days before challenge [d(-2)]. c Protection against infection conferred by 7DW8-5 administered at 2 µg IN 1 or 2 days before virus challenge [d(-1) or d(-2)] and less robustly if given 3 days before challenge [d(-3)], but not when given 2 h post-challenge [h(+2)]. (d) 0.5 or 2 µg IN but less so at 0.1 µg. e Repeat dosing of 7DW8-5 (0.2 µg; IN) every other day for 10 days (5x) conferred protection comparable to a single dose 2 days before viral challenge (1x). f Protection against infection conferred by 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN; 2 days before challenge) detected in both lungs and nasal turbinates. The dotted lines in the TCID50/g graphs indicate the limit of quantitation of the viral load. Non-parametric statistical analysis was done for experiments shown in (b) through (f), in Prism v 9.3 using two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test, and the results (including statistics) represent one of two independent biological experiments. Mean (black line) ± SEM is represented for each of the above graphs (b–f). g Representative 100 X images of lungs from 7DW8-5- and saline-treated mice before and after SARS-CoV-2 MA10 infection. H&E shown in the top panels. Bottom panels show immunohistochemistry (IHC) labeling against SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid, counterstained with hematoxylin.Full size imageIn this work, we show that the CD1d-iNKT cell-dependent effect of 7DW8-544,50 prevents infection by SARS-CoV-2, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and influenza virus in animal models.Results7DW8-5 blocks SARS-CoV-2 infectionWe tested the hypothesis that the immunostimulatory effect of 7DW8-5 could inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection in mice. First, 7DW8-5 (2 microgram (µg)) was administered intravenously (IV) or intranasally (IN) to groups of BALB/c mice two days before each animal was challenged IN with 5 × 104 plaque-forming units (PFU) of the mouse-adapted MA10 strain51 of SARS-CoV-2. A third group of mice received saline and served as controls, while a fourth group was given 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN) at 2 h post-virus challenge. When compared to controls, both IV and IN pre-exposure administrations of 7DW8-5 resulted in significant protection against MA10 infection as manifested by preservation of body weight and striking reductions of infectious virus in lung tissues (Fig. 1b). A follow-up study was performed to assess the timing of the antiviral effect exerted by 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN). Strong protection against MA10 infection was observed when this glycolipid was given to mice either one or two days prior to virus exposure, whereas the protection was only partial when given three days prior (Fig. 1c). The post-exposure administration of 7DW8-5 showed a partial protective effect (Fig. 1c). A dose-exploration experiment then demonstrated robust protection of 7DW8-5 (IN; 2 days prior) at doses of 0.5 µg or 2 µg, whereas the protection was suboptimal at a dose of 0.1 µg (Fig. 1d).We next assessed whether the repeated dosing of 7DW8-5 could lead to possible NKT-cell anergy and thus the loss of its antiviral efficacy. To this end, 7DW8-5 (0.2 µg; IN) was administered to a group of mice every other day for 10 days (for a total of five doses) before MA10 challenge. Serving as a comparator, another group of mice received the same glycolipid (0.2 µg; IN) only once at two days prior to virus exposure. The observed protective effects were equivalent for the two groups (Fig. 1e), indicating lack of anergy with repeated dosing of 7DW8-5 under these experimental conditions. It has been shown that an intraperitoneal or intravenous administration of a large dose (2-5 µg) of an iNKT-stimulatory glycolipid (α-GalCer) induced iNKT cell anergy that causes unresponsiveness in mice52,53. Therefore, we also tested a larger dose (2 µg) of 7DW8-5 glycolipid intranasally to mice every other day for 10 days before MA10 challenge (Supplementary Fig. 1). Although the degree of the antiviral activity reduced, the repeated administration of a large dose of the glycolipid could still exert protective effects. This finding was corroborated by earlier study showing that intranasal but not intravenous delivery of α-GalCer permits repeated stimulation of natural killer T cells in the lung54. Finally, to evaluate whether the antiviral effect occurred at the site of virus inoculation, mice were again given 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN) two days before MA10 challenge, followed by harvesting of nasal turbinates and lungs three days later. Marked reductions of SARS-CoV-2 infection were observed in both sets of tissues from mice treated with 7DW8-5 (Fig. 1f).Lung histopathologic analyses with hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining before and after MA10 challenge51 revealed early multifocal damage with an accumulation of inflammatory cells, sloughed epithelial cells, and plasma proteins in the airway lumens (Fig. 1g). Treatment with 7DW8-5 prevented such lung tissue damage. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining51,55 for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid revealed an intense staining at 3-day post-infection in the lung tissue of a saline-treated and MA10-challenged mouse, whereas there was reduced staining and no visible staining in the lung tissues of mice treated with a single dosing or repeat dosing of 7DW8-5, respectively (Fig. 1g). In fact, when the number of infected spots were counted, both single and multiple dosing of 7DW8-5 significantly reduced the number of spots (Supplementary Fig. 2), consistent with the observed reduction in lung viral titers (Fig. 1b–e).Breadth of protectionWe also assessed the antiviral effect of 7DW8-5 against other SARS-CoV-2 strains, starting with the Omicron subvariants BA.1 and BA.5, which can infect wild-type mice without prior adaptation. However, this infection model typically resulted in no weight loss in the infected animals as well as lower levels of virus replication56. Compared to controls, administration of 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN) 2 days before the virus challenge (1.5 × 105 PFU) led to significant weight gain and complete or robust inhibition of virus replication in lung tissues (Fig. 2a, b). A similar experiment was carried out using the Delta variant, which cannot infect wild-type mice but can infect K18-human ACE2-transgenic mice as well as hamsters57. Once more, administration of 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN; 2 days prior) significantly lowered the viral load in both lung and nasal tissues of the virus-challenged (103 PFU) K18 human-ACE2 transgenic mice (Fig. 2c). Similarly, 7DW8-5 (100 µg/kg; IN) given 2 days before Delta variant challenge (105 PFU) significantly decreased the viral load in lung and nasal tissues of treated hamsters (Fig. 2d). In both experiments, the protection against the Delta variant was less robust than previously observed for MA10 or Omicron subvariants in wild-type mice, perhaps due to differences in virus susceptibility of the animal models. For example, the hACE2 expression pattern is known to be different in K18-hACE2 Tg mice58, likely making them more permissive to infection.Fig. 2: 7DW8-5 has a broad antiviral activity against three different RNA viruses.Breadth of protection conferred by 7DW8-5 (IN; 2 days before) extends to SARS-CoV-2 Omicron BA.1 and BA.5 variants in BALB/c mice (a, b) and Delta variant in K18 human-ACE2 transgenic C57BL/6 mice (c) or Syrian hamsters (d), as well as to RSV A2 strain in BALB/c mice (e) and influenza A1/H1N1/PR8 strain in C57BL/6 mice (f, g). The dose of challenge virus used is indicated at the top of each figure panel, and the number of animals used is reflected by the number of data points. The dose of 7DW8-5 given to mice was 2 µg each, whereas the dose for hamsters was 100 µg/kg. In (a, b), body weight was measured prior to and on day 3 post-viral challenge, and the infectious viral load was determined 3 days after viral challenge, as was done for (c) for both lung and nasal tissues. In (d), the viral load was determined 5 days after challenge. In (e), body weight was measured prior to and on day 2 post-viral challenge, and the lung viral load was determined 4 days after the challenge. In (f), body weight was measured prior to and on day 3 post-challenge, and the lung viral load was determined 3 days after challenge. In (g), a Kaplan–Meier survival plot is shown following a lethal influenza virus challenge. Non-parametric statistical analysis was done for all the experiments shown in (a) through (f), in Prism v 9.3, using two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test, and the results (including statistics) represent one of two independent biological experiments. Mean (black line) ± SEM is represented for each of the above graphs (a–f). The dotted lines in the TCID50/g graphs and PFU/mL graphs indicate the limit of quantitation of the viral load. A log-rank Cox–Mantel test was performed in (g) to compare the survival curves of the two groups with a hazard ratio of 10.63 between them.Full size imageGiven that 7DW8-5 had no direct antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 3) and was likely stimulating a part of the innate immune system, we then explored whether its protection could be extended to other clinically important viral pathogens: RSV and influenza virus. For the former, an RSV-A2 strain known to infect BALB/c mice was used59. As shown in Fig. 2e, administration of 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN; 2 days prior) significantly prevented weight loss and inhibited virus infection in lung tissues of treated mice. For the influenza studies, strain A/H1N1/PR8 known to infect C57BL/6 mice was used60. Again, administration of 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN; 2 days prior) significantly prevented body weight loss and reduced the amount of infectious virus in lung tissues of treated mice (Fig. 2f). In a longer-term experiment using a lethal dose (5 × 103 PFU) of influenza A/H1N1/PR8, all control mice died by Day 10 after virus exposure as expected, whereas 8 of 10 mice given 7DW8-5 survived (Fig. 2g). Taken together, the findings in Fig. 2 suggest that this glycolipid has substantial protective activity against divergent respiratory viruses, perhaps due to stimulation of a specific immune pathway, followed by a reciprocal stimulation of iNKT cell and CD1d-expressing DC activation.Cytokine inductionWe subsequently determined the level of gene expression of cytokines/chemokines in nasal turbinate tissue of BALB/c mice one day after administration of 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN) or saline. We averaged three independent experiments with each comprising of 3 BALB/c mice. IFN-γ was the most upregulated cytokine in the nasal turbinate upon 7DW8-5 treatment (Fig. 3a). We also characterized the cytokine/chemokine profile in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), homogenates of nasal turbinates or lungs, and sera in BALB/c mice (N = 6) one day after administration of 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN) or saline. Marked upregulation of multiple cytokines/chemokines was detected in all compartments examined from the treated animals, including IFN-γ, IL-5, IL-6, IP-10, TNF-α, MCP1, and MIG (Fig. 3b). IFN-γ, in particular, is a known antiviral cytokine61. Since IFN-λ has also been reported to have activity against SARS-CoV-2 in mice62, we also measured the levels of this cytokine in the supernatants of nasal turbinate and lung homogenates, as well as in sera, from mice treated with 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN; 1 day prior) or saline. No evidence of IFN-λ induction was noted (Supplementary Fig. 4). A single-cell, RNA-sequence analysis of lung mononuclear cells from 7DW8-5-treated mice was conducted according to a specific experimental protocol (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b), and the expression levels of representative marker genes were documented within 18 distinct immune cell populations (Supplementary Fig. 5c). The most salient observation is the apparent shift toward IFN-γ production seen in proliferating NK cells and T cells, as well as in iNKT cells and γδ T cells, after exposure to 7DW8-5 (Fig. 3c). These findings implicate IFN-γ as possibly having a central role in mediating the antiviral activity of our glycolipid. Additional analysis of the iNKT cells identified in each UMAP of 7DW8-5 and saline (Fig. 3c) further categorized them into iNKT subsets including iNKT1, iNKT2, iNKT17 and iNKT10, based on the expression of the signature gene markers, as previously described63. A majority of iNKT cell subset, which had expanded among lung MNCs 3 days after intranasal administration (2 µg) of 7DW8-5, was iNKT1 (Supplementary Fig. 6a). Therefore, an iNKT1 subset, which secretes IFN-γ, appears to predominantly contribute to viral clearance. From our UMAP data (Fig. 3c), we have also categorized DC subsets and determined that 30% of mature DCs (mDCs) was found to express IL-15 among lung MNCs 3 days after intranasal administration (2 µg) of 7DW8-5 Supplementary Fig. 6b), whereas mDCs constitutively express IL-12 (data not shown). Plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) and conventional DCs (cDCs) express minimal amount of IL-12 (data not shown) before and after 7DW8-5 treatment.Fig. 3: Cytokine induction in BALB/c mice given 7DW8-5 (2 µg; IN).a Heatmap showing the differential expression of the genes (as indicated) in nasal turbinates (NT), which is an average of three independent experiments with each consisting of a group of 3 BALB/c mice 24 h after 7DW8-5 (2 µg) or saline administration by IN. The scale bar shows the average Z-score. b Induction of cytokines/chemokines in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), supernatants of homogenates of lung (LH) and nasal turbinates (NT), and sera 24 h after 7DW8-5 administration to mice (N = 6), as assessed using the Mouse Cytokine Array/Chemokine Array 31-Plex (MD31) platform (Eve Technologies). Cytokine concentrations are plotted (in circles) and averages shown (using bar graphs), and the fold-change seen with 7DW8-5 treatment is expressed at the top. c Shift toward IFN-\(\gamma\)-producing cells as presented by Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) of total 27,532 single CD45+ cells from the lungs from 3 BALB/c mice 24 h after treating with 7DW8-5 or saline (also see Supplementary Fig. 5a). The UMAP was split into 15,397 single cells (7DW8-5, left) and 12,135 single cells (saline, right). Each cluster (as indicated) was identified by unsupervised clustering and colored separately. iNKT cells were identified based on the expression of the semi-invariant TCR Vα14-Jα18.Full size imageMechanism of protectionThe final portion of this study addressed the mechanism of protection for 7DW8-5. First, the role of CD1d-mediated activation was examined by comparing 7DW8-5 to its active parental compound, α-GalCer, and to 1:18 caproylamine PE, which is known to bind to CD1d without stimulating iNKT cells due to the lack of a sugar moiety (Supplementary Fig. 7)44,64. Both 7DW8-5 and α-GalCer administration (0.1 µg; IN; 2 days prior) resulted in protection. However, there is a significant difference in lung viral load between the mice receiving α-GalCer versus 7DW8-5 upon MA10 challenge (Fig. 4a). The administration of 1:18 caproylamine PE at a much higher dose (2 µg; IN) failed to protect. This finding led to a subsequent experiment using CD1d knock-out (KO) mice. Indeed, the protective effect of 7DW8-5 observed in wild-type mice against SARS-CoV-2 MA10 challenge was completely abolished in CD1d-KO mice (Fig. 4b), demonstrating the indispensable role of CD1d activation in the antiviral activity of 7DW8-5.Fig. 4: Mechanism of Protection of 7DW8-5 against SARS-CoV-2 MA10.a 7DW8-5 (0.1 µg; IN) and α-GalCer (0.1 µg; IN) to a lesser degree exert protective effect against SARS-CoV-2 in BALB/c mice when given 2 days before intranasal challenge with 50,000 PFU of the MA10 strain. Protection was based on body weight changes and infectious viral load in lung tissues on day 3 after virus challenge. The protective effect of 7DW8-5 is abolished in CD1d-KO BALB/c mice (b) or IFN-\(\gamma\)-KO C57BL/6 mice (c). d The protective effect of 7DW8-5 observed in wild-type mice is lost upon pre-treatment with a blocking anti-mouse-IFN-\(\gamma\) monoclonal antibody (XMG 1.2 at 0.5 mg) but preserved upon intraperitoneal pre-treatment with a mouse IgG1 isotype-control monoclonal antibody (0.5 mg). 2 µg of 7DW8-5 was dosed in each animal used in (b–d). Non-parametric statistical analysis was done for all the experiments shown in (a) through (d), in Prism v 9.3 using two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test, and the results (including statistics) represent one of two independent biological experiments. Mean (black line) ± SEM is represented for each of the above graphs. The dotted lines in the TCID50/g graphs indicate the limit of quantitation of the viral load.Full size imageNext, we determined the role IFN-γ played in contributing to the biological activity of 7DW8-5 by conducting protection studies in mice deficient in IFN-γ. Once again, the antiviral activity of 7DW8-5 observed in wild-type mice against SARS-CoV-2 MA10 challenge was totally lost in IFN-γ-KO mice (Fig. 4c). Furthermore, the anti-SARS-CoV-2 effect of 7DW8-5 in wild-type mice was largely eliminated by the intraperitoneal injection of a blocking anti-mouse-IFN-γ monoclonal antibody prior to the glycolipid treatment (Fig. 4d). These latter results establish that IFN-γ is another essential mediator of the activity of 7DW8-5, along with CD1d.The next imminent question relates to the translatability of our findings from small animal models to humans. CD1d molecule has been known to be highly conserved between humans and mice20. In fact, 7DW8-5 was able to noticeably stimulate primary human CD161highTCRVα24+ NKT cells to secrete IFN-γ in vitro (Supplementary Fig. 8a–c). Most importantly, we found that the supernatants collected from human iNKT cell lines stimulated with CD1d-transfected Hela cells in the presence of 7DW8-5, but not PE, were able to significantly inhibit ic-SARS-CoV-2-mNeonGreen65 infection in Huh7 cells in vitro66, and that this inhibition was completely abolished when neutralizing anti-human IFN-γ Ab was added to the culture (Supplementary Fig. 8d). All these results indicate a significant role that IFN-γ plays for mediating anti-SARS-CoV-2 activity by 7DW8-5 both in mice and humans.DiscussionWe have found that intranasal administration of 7DW8-5, an immunostimulatory glycolipid, worked well as pre-exposure prophylaxis in blocking SARS-CoV-2 infection in wild-type mice, as shown by maintenance of body weight and >2 log reduction of virus replication in the lung (Fig. 1b–f), as well as by the marked reduction of viral nucleocapsid protein in the lung tissue (Fig. 1g). The viral load in the nasal turbinates was also reduced by ~50-fold (Fig. 1f), which is more than the blockade seen with monoclonal antibodies in this tissue compartment67. However, post-exposure administration of 7DW8-5 was ineffective (Fig. 1c), suggesting that this glycolipid will not be useful as a therapeutic, perhaps because its immunostimulatory effects need a sufficient head start in order to slow a fast-replicating virus. We also showed that the protection conferred by 7DW8-5 extended to three authentic SARS-CoV-2 variants, including Omicron subvariants BA.1 and BA.5 in wild-type mice (Fig. 2a, b) and the Delta variant in K18 human-ACE2 transgenic mice and hamsters (Fig. 2c & 2d). Moreover, comparable antiviral activity was observed in mice following challenges with RSV (Fig. 2e) or influenza virus (Fig. 2f, g). Overall, these findings demonstrate the breadth of protection of 7DW8-5 versus three families of respiratory viruses (coronaviruses, paramyxoviruses, and orthomyxoviruses), each of which is not only clinically important but also of pandemic potential.The parental glycolipid, α-GalCer, is a potent activator of iNKT cells, inducing the production of large amounts of IFN-γ, which helps activate both CD8+ T cells and antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as DCs, macrophages, and B cells46. We have previously shown that the action of 7DW8-5 is also dependent on CD1d and iNKT cells44. It is noteworthy that when a small dose (0.1 µg) of 7DW8-5 or α-GalCer was given to mice, followed by MA10 challenge, 7DW8-5 exerted a significantly more potent antiviral effect, resulting in a more reduced lung virus load (Fig. 4a). While many cytokines/chemokines were induced by this glycolipid (Fig. 3a, b), its antiviral effect was entirely abolished in CD1d-KO mice (Fig. 4b), which was anticipated since 7DW8-5 was selected for optimal binding to and triggering through both human and mouse CD1d (Fig. 1a)44. Similarly, another essential component of the protective effect was shown to be IFN-γ, a molecule in the innate immune system known to possess broad antimicrobial activities61. Indeed, 7DW8-5 showed no protection at all in IFN-γ-KO mice (Fig. 4c), and its protective effect in wild-type mice was largely lost when pre-treatment with a blocking anti-IFN-γ monoclonal antibody was given (Fig. 4d). Therefore, both CD1d and IFN-γ are necessary for the activity of 7DW8-5 in vivo; however, it remains unclear if both are sufficient because there may be important mediators downstream of IFN-γ.It is our belief that 7DW8-5 holds promise as an agent for pre-exposure prophylaxis to prevent infections by SARS-CoV-2, RSV, influenza virus, and possibly other clinically important respiratory viruses. Its potential utility to future viral pandemics has not escaped us either. It is a chemical compound that is thermostable and thus simple to ship and store, cheap to manufacture, and easy to administer intranasally. Given our collective experiences with the COVID-19 pandemic, it is not hard for anyone to conjure up numerous everyday situations when high-risk exposures could be anticipated and when an effective preventive measure could be applied, if available. But would the results from rodents reported here be translatable to humans? A definitive answer could only come from the conduct of clinical studies, but there is reasonable expectation that 7DW8-5 could be similarly effective in people. First, we selected this glycolipid from a library of analogues based on its potent stimulatory effect on human iNKT cells in vitro44. 7DW8-5 displayed 80-times higher binding affinity to human CD1d than α-GalCer and exerted a 140-fold higher dose sparing effect against human iNKT cells over α-GalCer. Second, iNKT cells constitute up to 1% of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in both humans and mice68,69, although the variability is greater among humans68. Lastly, we have shown in this study that the supernatant of human iNKT cells activated by 7DW8-5 can display anti-viral activity in vitro and that the activity is inhibited by anti-human IFN-γ antibody (Supplementary Fig. 8).Many challenges will need to be overcome before 7DW8-5 could be considered a candidate for clinical development. Foremost among them is its safety and tolerability, because the induction of cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-6 (Fig. 3a, b), could result in an exaggerated inflammatory response. Formal safetyoxicity studies in two or more animal species will therefore be required. However, several observations address this concern. Prior clinical trials70,71,72,73 using the parental glycolipid, α-GalCer, when administered (6 IV doses of 0.12 mg/kg) to cancer patients showed no evidence of toxicity70. In a vaccine adjuvant study in rhesus macaques, up to 100 µg of 7DW8-5 intramuscularly did not lead to any adverse reactions74, similar to the lack of toxicity noted in mice and hamsters in the current study. Nevertheless, additional studies on 7DW8-5 will also be necessary to narrow the duration of its prophylactic effect, to determine more precisely its optimal dose, and to assess for evidence of anergy with its repeated usage over a protracted period.Current COVID-19 vaccines have mitigated the impact of the pandemic by decreasing symptomatic infections, hospitalizations, and deaths. The excessive fear that was once rampant has largely dissipated due to the development of these vaccines as well as effective treatments. However, as SARS-CoV-2 has continued to evolve antigenically75, breakthrough infections have become common76, resulting, at a minimum, in major disruptions to our daily lives. Additional prevention modalities are therefore needed. If found to be safe, 7DW8-5 could be another tool in our fight against COVID-19 and other respiratory virus infections, which would also lead to a huge economical loss. The strength of the CD1d agonist would lie in the rapid responses to unknown emerging viral infections when vaccines and other virus-specific approaches are still under investigation. In this regard, there is also a possibility of an alternative use of 7DW8-5 glycolipid, as a vaccine adjuvant74. In conclusion, this immunostimulatory glycolipid could be applied practically using diverse strategies to respond to future outbreaks or pandemics caused by an emergent respiratory virus, preceding and during development of drugs and vaccines.MethodsData reportingPower analysis based on guidelines by Institute for Laboratory Animal Research were used to predetermine sample size to estimate minimum number of animals required to detect significant effect of 7DW8-5 glycolipid, if one is detected. The experiments were not randomized, and the investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.Ethics statementHuman peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from anonymous blood donors were obtained from leukopacks provided by the New York Blood Center (NYBC). The NYBC does not select donors on the basis of gender or race but ensures that all donors are above 18 years of age. Therefore, the work we performed did not require approval from the Institutional Review Board. All animal experiments were carried out in strict accordance with the Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the United States Public Health Service. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at The Columbia University (Animal Welfare Assurance no. D16-00003) and the Washington University School of Medicine (Animal Welfare Assurance no. A3381–01). Virus inoculations were performed under anesthesia that was induced and maintained with ketamine hydrochloride and xylazine, and all efforts were made to minimize animal suffering. Mice and hamsters were euthanized with CO2, with every effort made to minimize suffering.AnimalsFemale BALB/c mice with 10–15 weeks of age and female C57BL/6 mice with 14-15 weeks of age, as well as female BALB/c mice lacking CD1d1 and CD1d2 genes (strain: C.129S2-Cd1tm1Gru/J) and female C57BL/6 mice lacking IFN-\(\gamma\) (strain: B6.129S7-Ifngtm1Ts/J) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions in the animal facility at Columbia University Irving Medical Center. Heterozygous 8-9 weeks old female K18-hACE C57BL/6J mice (strain: 2B6.Cg-Tg(K18-ACE2)2Prlmn/J) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory and housed in a pathogen-free animal facility at Washington University School of Medicine. Male Syrian hamsters with 5–6 weeks of aged were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA) and housed in an enhance biosafety level 3 (BL3) facility at Washington University in St. Louis.GlycolipidsGlycolipid 7DW8-5 with chemical formula [(2S,3S,4R)-1-O-(α-D-galactopyranosyl)-N-(11-(4-fluorophenyl) undecanoyl)-2-amino-1,3,4-octadecanetriol)] was synthesized as previously described44. Glycolipid α-galactosyl ceramide (α-GalCer) with chemical formula [N-[(3S,4R)-3,4-dihydroxy-1-[(2S,3R,4S,5R,6R)-3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-(hydroxymethyl)oxan-2-yl]oxyoctadecan-2-yl]hexacosanamide] and control lipids with chemical formula 18:1 caproylamine PE [1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(hexanoylamine)] and 18:1 biotinyl PE [1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-(biotinyl) sodium salt] were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids.Cells and virusesVero-E6 (ATCC Cat #1586) and Vero-TMPRSS2-ACE2 cells (gift from Emory University) were cultured at 37 °C in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10 mM HEPES pH 7.3, and 100 U/ml of penicillin–streptomycin. Huh7, a human hepatocarcinoma cell line was purchased from Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources (JCRB0403) and cultured in same conditions as Vero-E6 cells. The SARS-CoV-2 MA10, Delta variant (B.1.617.2) and Omicron variants, BA.1 and BA.5 viruses, were obtained from BEI (cat # NR-55329, NR-55691, NR-56475 and NR-58616). Omicron stock was propagated in Vero-TMPRSS2 cells as described7 while other SARS-CoV-2 isolates were propagated in Vero E6 cells for this study as described77. The infectious clone ic-SARS-CoV-2, WA1/mNeonGreen was obtained from the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses (WRCEVA) at the University of Texas Medical Branch and propagated and titrated in Vero-E6 cells prior to use. All work with infectious SARS-CoV-2 was performed in approved BSL3 and A-BSL3 facilities at Columbia University Irving Medical Center or at Washington University using appropriate positive pressure air respirators and protective equipment. Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells (Cat # CCL-34) and HEp-2 cells (Cat # CCL-23) were purchased from the ATCC. Influenza A virus (H1N1) PR/8/34 strain (Cat # VR-95) and human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) A2 isolate (Cat # VR-26PQ), purchased from ATCC were propagated and titrated in MDCK and Hep-2 cells, respectively under BSL2 condition. Hep-2 cells purchased from ATCC (Cat # CCL-23) have been registered by the International Cell Line Authentication Committee as a cell line that is derived via HeLa contamination but has been validated for propagation of (RSV) A2 isolate in the laboratory prior to titration experiments.Nasal turbinate and lung homogenatesNasal turbinate was harvested from mice as described78. Briefly, the skin was dissected and completely removed from the skull and nose, and the skull sectioned in the coronal plane. Then the remainder of the anterior skull was removed. After removing the posterior aspect of the skull base, the scissor was inserted into the posterior nasal cavity. The suture line was then incised bilaterally revealing the nasal septum. The scissor separated the two maxillas (laterally) and the ethmoid bone (medially) along the distinct suture line. Finally, the upper palate and anterior nasal tip were removed to complete the dissection. For the nasal turbinate from hamster, nasal turbinate was harvested by first removing the skin along the side of the nose and cheeks. The jaw was then cut exposing the hamster’s palate. A sagittal incision through the palate was made exposing the nasal turbinate which was removed via blunt forceps. The nasal turbinate was homogenized in 1 mL DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, l-glutamine and 1% HEPES. Homogenate was centrifuged at 1000g for 5 min. Whole lung tissue was weighed after separation from bronchial tubes and other non-lung tissues, placed in BioMasher II tube (Diagnocine LLC) with 250 µL of DMEM media supplemented with 2% heat-inactivated FBS and manually homogenized by rotating the grinder back and forth until all the tissue was thoroughly homogenized. Afterwards, the tissue homogenates in the tubes were centrifuged at 1000g at 4–10 °C for 10 min. For both nasal turbinate and lung homogenates, the supernatant was collected and stored at −80 °C for viral titer and viral load detection.Tissue viral load assaysLung and nasal turbinate homogenates of 7DW8-5- or saline-treated and challenged mice and hamsters collected in the ABSL3 facility was used to set up the TCID50 titration assay. Serial 2-fold dilution of the samples were added to a 96-well plate seeded with 2 × 104 Vero-E6 cells at 37 °C under 5% CO277. Three days later, the wells were visually scored for cytopathic effect (CPE, as observed by light microscopy) of the cells at each dilution, to determine the end point TCID. For the PFU assay, Vero-TMPRSS2-ACE2 cells were seeded at a density of 1.25 × 105 cells/well in flat-bottom 24-well tissue culture plates. The following day, media was replaced with 200 microliters of 10-fold serial dilutions of sample, diluted in DMEM + 2% FBS. One hour later, 1 mL of methylcellulose overlay was added. Plates were incubated for 72 h, then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (final concentration) in PBS for 1 h. Plates were stained with 0.05% (w/v) crystal violet in 20% methanol and washed twice with distilled, deionized water. Plaques were counted, and titers were calculated according to a previously described method79.For RSV titration, lung homogenates of saline or 7DW8-5 treated and challenged mice were serially diluted by 4-fold and overlaid on confluent layer of Hep-2 cells59. A virus control standard of the A2 isolate used to infect the mice was also serially diluted and run in parallel to compare the resulting CPE. Infected and control cells were incubated at 37 °C under 5% CO2 for 5 days. Viral CPE was observed under microscope for each dilution. Using the endpoint dilution method, the TCID50 was calculated per treatment group.For influenza PR8 virus titration, lung homogenates of saline- or 7DW8-5-treated mice were harvested on day-5 post challenge with 200 PFU of PR8/A/34 virus per mouse. Homogenates were serially diluted by 3-fold and overlaid on a confluent layer of Martin Delaney Canine kidney (MDCK) cells. The PR8/A/34 isolate also serially diluted and used as positive control. Cells were incubated at 33 °C/5% CO2 and supernatants were collected at 72 h to determine viral neuraminidase activity from each well using a fluorescence assay80,81 with the NA-Fluor Influenza Neuraminidase Assay kit (Applied Biosystems). Production of fluorogenic product 4-methylumbelliferone was read in a Spectramax i3X microplate reader using excitation wavelength of 360 nm and emission wavelength of 450 nm. Negative controls using uninfected cell supernatants serve as blank for the assay. Fluorescence data was collected using Softmax Pro 7.0.2 software. The endpoint for each sample was calculated as 3-fold or higher increase of the neuraminidase activity compared to the controls. TCID/g of lung was calculated for each sample and plotted using GraphPad Prism v9.3.Histology and immunohistochemistryHistological and immunohistochemical assays were conducted as described51,55. Immediately after euthanasia, the left lung lobe was harvested and fixed by submersion in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin for overnight, followed by submersion in 70% ethanol for up to one week, which was enough to disinfect the viruses. Fixed tissue was manually embedded in paraffin, and sections were prepared at 4 µm thickness. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Richard Allan Scientific, San Diego, CA). For immunohistochemistry, antigen retrieval was performed with antigen unmasking solution (pH 6.0 citrate buffer, H-3300, Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA), followed by peroxide incubation. The tissue sections were first incubated with primary antibody, SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein rabbit mAb (26369, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA) for overnight, and then with secondary antibody, HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibody (MP7401, Vector Laboratories). The signal was then amplified using a DAB staining kit (NC9567138, Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and it was counterstained with hematoxylin. Finally, tissues were tiled scanned using an Aperio AT2 slide scanner (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL), and images were captured with an Aperio ImageScope (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL).RNA isolation and RT-qPCRTotal RNA was isolated from nasal turbinates with miRNeasy micro kit (Qiagen, 217084) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. ERCC RNA Spike-In Mix kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, 4456740) was added to normalized total RNA prior to library preparation following the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA sequencing libraries were prepared using the NEBNext Ultra II RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina according to the manufacturer’s instructions (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). The samples were sequenced by the Illumina HiSeq instrument according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a 2x150bp Paired End (PE) configuration. After the stringent QC of the raw data, sequence reads were trimmed to remove possible adapter sequences and nucleotides with poor quality using Trimmomatic v.0.36. The trimmed reads were mapped to the Mus musculus reference genome available on ENSEMBL using the STAR aligner v.2.5.2b. BAM files were generated as a result of this step. Unique gene hit counts were calculated by using feature Counts from the Subread package v.1.5.2. Only unique reads that fell within exon regions were counted. After extraction of gene hit counts, the gene hit counts table was used for downstream differential expression analysis. Using DESeq2, a comparison of gene expression between the groups of samples was performed.Treatment with anti-IFN-\(\gamma\) antibodyFor IFN-\(\gamma\) neutralization, anti-mouse IFN-\(\gamma\) antibody (BioXCell; clone XMG1.2) or a rat IgG1 isotype control (BioXCell; clone HRPN) was administered to mice by intraperitoneal injection at Day -1 (0.5 mg) and Day 0 (0.5 mg) relative to MA10 inoculation.Harvesting bronchoalveolar lavageBronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was harvested as described82. Briefly, after euthanizing the mouse, the animal was placed on its back on a surgical plate. After making an incision in the neck skin near the trachea using a scalpel, the trachea surrounded by sternohyoid muscle was exposed. After placing a cotton thread under the trachea using pincers, the middle of the exposed trachea between two cartilage rings was carefully punctured with a 26 G needle. Then, the catheter of about 0.5 cm was inserted into the trachea and stabilized by tying the trachea around the catheter using the cotton thread placed. A 1 mL syringe loaded with 1 mL of sterile balanced salt solution with 100 μM EDTA was connected to the catheter and the salt/EDTA solution was gently injected into the catheter. The solution was then gently aspirated while massaging the thorax of the mouse. The syringe was removed from the needle and the recovered lavage fluid was transferred into a 15 mL tube placed on ice.Cytokine and chemokine measurementsSera, as well as supernatants were collected by centrifugation of nasal turbinates (NT), bronchioalveolar lavage (BAL), and lung homogenates (LH) of mice treated with 7DW8-5 one day before. Sera and supernatants were also collected from mice treated with saline one day before. The sera and supernatants were analyzed for cytokines and chemokines by Eve Technologies Corporation (Calgary, AB, Canada) using their Mouse Cytokine /Chemokine 31-Plex Array (MD31).Harvesting lung mononuclear cellsLung mononuclear cells (MNCs) were harvested as described83. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 5a, lungs were first perfused with PBS containing collagenase IV and DNase1. Single cell suspensions were prepared by mechanical dissociation of lung tissue through a 70-μm nylon mesh, followed by being layered on Ficoll-Paque (Sigma) and centrifuged at room temperature for 20 min at 900 g. After collecting lung MNC from the gradient interphase, the cells were incubated with anti-mouse Fc receptor antibody (BioLegend, Cat # 101320) to block nonspecific antibody binding. Each sample was then stained with phycoerythrin-labeled anti-mouse CD45 antibody (BioLegend, Cat # 103106) for 30 min. Just before sorting cells, DAPI (×10,000 dilution) was added. Viable cells were sorted by FACS Aria II by gating DAPI negative CD45 positive cells, followed by analyzing using FlowJo v10.8.1 software, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 5b.Single cell 5’ transcript and TCRαβ enriched library preparation on the 10x Chromium and sequencingThe scRNA-Seq and scTCR-Seq libraries were prepared using the 10x Chromium single-cell 5’ reagent kits v2 (Dual Index), per manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, after cell sorting, single-cell suspensions were loaded into the Chromium controller to make nanoliter-scale droplets with uniquely barcoded 5′ gel beads called GEMs (gel bead-in emulsions). After GEM-RT, GEMs were cleaned up by Dyna beads MyOne Silane beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 37002D). According to the manufacturer’s instructions, the cDNA was amplified and size-selected by SPRI-beads (Beckman Coulter, B23317). Finally, the 5′ transcript and TCR-seq libraries were pooled and sequenced with the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 system.Data processing of scRNA-seq and TCR-seqFASTQ files were processed by Cell Ranger v.6.1.2 (10x Genomics) software using the GRCm38 (GENCODE vM23/Ensembl 98) genome as a reference. The data analyzed in R using the Seurat v.4.1.0 package were merged and integrated using an anchor-based single-cell data integration method in Seurat84. Cells with mitochondrial RNA content greater than 5% were excluded. Variable feature genes were set at 2000 genes. Once the data sets were integrated, the data were input into a principal component analysis (PCA) based on variable genes. The same principal components were used to generate the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projections (UMAPs). Clusters were identified using shared nearest neighbor–based (SNN-based) clustering. For the clustering analysis, the function RunUMAP, FindClusters, and FindNeighbors in Seurat were used. Single cell TCR sequencing was aligned and quantified using the cellranger-vdj software (v.6.1.2). For the data analysis, the output file filtered_contig_annotations.csv was used.Activation of human iNKT cells by 7DW8-5 in vitroPeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from 8 healthy donors using Ficoll Paque Plus gradient (Merck Millipore, MA, Cat# GE17-1440-02). PBMCs were added to 96 U-bottom well plates (0.5 × 106 cells/well) in duplicates and stimulated with 7DW8-5 at 0.1 and 1 mM final concentration. In parallel, PBMCs were also treated with 18:1 PE at 1 mM final concentration. PBMCs were stimulated for 24 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere. In the final 4 h, Brefeldin A was added at 10 mg/mL and incubated for the 4 additional hours. After that, PBMC supernatants were harvested and stored for analysis of secreted IFN-γ by Luminex (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. PBMCs were washed and stained with PE-Cy7 anti-CD3 (clone: SK7), PERCP Cy5.5 anti-TCRVα24 (clone: C15), AF647 anti-CD161 (clone: HP3G10), AF700 anti-CD8 (clone: RPA-T8) and APC-Cy7 anti-CD69 (clone: FN50), for 30 min at room temperature. After staining, cells were permeabilized and stained with anti-human IFN-γ antibody for 40 min at room temperature. After staining, cells were washed with washing solution twice and resuspended in PBS for immediate flow cytometric acquisition. For FACS acquisition, 1 × 105 lymphocytes were acquired using a BD LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) Flow Cytometer. Data acquisition was performed using the FACS DIVA software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and data analysis using FlowJo software (version 10.6.2, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).In vitro stimulation of human iNKT cell lines by glycolipidsHuman iNKT cell lines and HeLa cells transfected with the human CD1d gene, HeLa-hCD1d, were established, as we previously reported44. Twenty thousand human iNKT cell lines from 3 different donors were co-cultured with 2 × 104 HeLa-hCD1d in a well of 96-well round-bottom plate in the presence of 1 µg/mL of 7DW8-5 glycolipid, 18:1 PE or saline (controls). After 24 h incubation, the cultured supernatants were collected and estimated for presence of IFN-γ using ELISA.In vitro inhibition of icSARS-CoV-2-mNG-infected Huh7 cellsSupernatants collected from stimulated human iNKT cell lines were serially diluted (2-fold) and incubated on a monolayer of Huh7 cells overnight at 37 C/5%CO2 for 20 h. A serial 5-fold dilution of recombinant human IFN-γ protein was used as positive control (Gibco cat# PHC4031). In addition, supernatants were combined and mixed with anti-human IFN-γ antibody (1 µg/mL) (BioXcell Cat# BE0235) to check for specific and non-specific effects. Following this incubation, the cells were infected with ic-SARS-CoV-2-mNeon isolate64 and incubated further for 24 h under similar conditions. After 24 h, cells were examined under fluorescent microscope to enumerate GFP+ cells and percent inhibition was calculated as the difference in fluorescence in the test wells compared to wells receiving no treatment (virus only) and plotted using GraphPad Prism v9.3.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Materials used in this study will be made available but may require execution of a materials transfer agreement. All the data are provided in the paper or the Supplementary Information. Source data are provided with this paper. mRNA sequencing data for comparing differential gene expression and RNA-sequencing data associated with single-cell RNA seq experiments have been made available on the European bioinformatics Institute (EBI) server via the ArrayExpress database using accession codes E-MTAB-12345 for mRNA and E-MTAB-11770 for the single cell sequencing. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesHammond, J. et al. Oral nirmatrelvir for high-risk, nonhospitalized adults with Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 1397–1408 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jayk Bernal, A. et al. Molnupiravir for oral treatment of Covid-19 in nonhospitalized patients. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 509–520 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Taylor, P. C. et al. Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies for treatment of COVID-19. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21, 382–393 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Edwards, A. M., Baric, R. S., Saphire, E. O. & Ulmer, J. B. Stopping pandemics before they start: Lessons learned from SARS-CoV-2. Science 375, 1133–1139 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Baden, L. R. et al. Efficacy and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 403–416 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Polack, F. P. et al. Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 vaccine. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 2603–2615 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Iketani, S. et al. Antibody evasion properties of SARS-CoV-2 Omicron sublineages. Nature 604, 553–556 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu, L. et al. Striking antibody evasion manifested by the Omicron variant of SARS-CoV-2. Nature 602, 676–681 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wali, S. et al. Immune modulation to improve survival of viral pneumonia in mice. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 63, 758–766 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kronenberg, M. Toward an understanding of NKT cell biology: progress and paradoxes. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 23, 877–900 (2005).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Bendelac, A., Rivera, M. N., Park, S. H. & Roark, J. H. Mouse CD1-specific NK1 T cells: development, specificity, and function. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 15, 535–562 (1997).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Godfrey, D. I., Uldrich, A. P., McCluskey, J., Rossjohn, J. & Moody, D. B. The burgeoning family of unconventional T cells. Nat. Immunol. 16, 1114–1123 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Renukaradhya, G. J. et al. Type I NKT cells protect (and type II NKT cells suppress) the host’s innate antitumor immune response to a B-cell lymphoma. Blood 111, 5637–5645 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Schmieg, J., Yang, G., Franck, R. W. & Tsuji, M. Superior protection against malaria and melanoma metastases by a C-glycoside analogue of the natural killer T cell ligand alpha-Galactosylceramide. J. Exp. Med. 198, 1631–1641 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, L. & Van Kaer, L. Natural killer T cells and autoimmune disease. Curr. Mol. Med. 9, 4–14 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gonzalez-Aseguinolaza, G. et al. alpha -galactosylceramide-activated Valpha 14 natural killer T cells mediate protection against murine malaria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 8461–8466 (2000).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brigl, M. et al. Innate and cytokine-driven signals, rather than microbial antigens, dominate in natural killer T cell activation during microbial infection. J. Exp. Med. 208, 1163–1177 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tupin, E. et al. NKT cells prevent chronic joint inflammation after infection with Borrelia burgdorferi. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 19863–19868 (2008).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sada-Ovalle, I., Chiba, A., Gonzales, A., Brenner, M. B. & Behar, S. M. Innate invariant NKT cells recognize Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected macrophages, produce interferon-gamma, and kill intracellular bacteria. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000239 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Brossay, L. et al. CD1d-mediated recognition of an alpha-galactosylceramide by natural killer T cells is highly conserved through mammalian evolution. J. Exp. Med. 188, 1521–1528 (1998).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Oleinika, K. et al. CD1d-dependent immune suppression mediated by regulatory B cells through modulations of iNKT cells. Nat. Commun. 9, 684 (2018).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ho, L. P. et al. Activation of invariant NKT cells enhances the innate immune response and improves the disease course in influenza A virus infection. Eur. J. Immunol. 38, 1913–1922 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tessmer, M. S., Fatima, A., Paget, C., Trottein, F. & Brossay, L. NKT cell immune responses to viral infection. Expert. Opin. Ther. Targets 13, 153–162 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ishikawa, H. et al. IFN-gamma production downstream of NKT cell activation in mice infected with influenza virus enhances the cytolytic activities of both NK cells and viral antigen-specific CD8+ T cells. Virology 407, 325–332 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Littwitz-Salomon, E., Schimmer, S. & Dittmer, U. Natural killer T cells contribute to the control of acute retroviral infection. Retrovirology 14, 5 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cui, G. et al. A circulating subset of iNKT cells mediates antitumor and antiviral immunity. Sci. Immunol. 7, eabj8760 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Riese, P. et al. Activated NKT cells imprint NK-cell differentiation, functionality and education. Eur. J. Immunol. 45, 1794–1807 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Trittel, S. et al. Invariant NKT cell-mediated modulation of ILC1s as a tool for mucosal immune intervention. Front Immunol 10, 1849 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gaya, M. et al. Initiation of antiviral B cell immunity relies on innate signals from spatially positioned NKT cells. Cell 172, 517–533.e520 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Johnson, T. R., Hong, S., Van Kaer, L., Koezuka, Y. & Graham, B. S. NK T cells contribute to expansion of CD8(+) T cells and amplification of antiviral immune responses to respiratory syncytial virus. J. Virol. 76, 4294–4303 (2002).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kawano, T. et al. CD1d-restricted and TCR-mediated activation of valpha14 NKT cells by glycosylceramides. Science 278, 1626–1629 (1997).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yu, K. O. et al. Modulation of CD1d-restricted NKT cell responses by using N-acyl variants of alpha-galactosylceramides. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 3383–3388 (2005).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tyznik, A. J. et al. Glycolipids that elicit IFN-gamma-biased responses from natural killer T cells. Chem. Biol. 18, 1620–1630 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jervis, P. J. et al. New CD1d agonists: synthesis and biological activity of 6”-triazole-substituted alpha-galactosyl ceramides. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 22, 4348–4352 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Veerapen, N. et al. Photoactivable glycolipid antigens generate stable conjugates with CD1d for invariant natural killer T cell activation. Bioconjug. Chem. 29, 3161–3173 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hsieh, M. H. et al. Synthesis and evaluation of acyl-chain- and galactose-6”-modified analogues of alpha-GalCer for NKT cell activation. Chembiochem 13, 1689–1697 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Guillaume, J. et al. Synthesis of C-5” and C-6”-modified alpha-GalCer analogues as iNKT-cell agonists. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 23, 3175–3182 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guillaume, J. et al. Galactosylsphingamides: new alpha-GalCer analogues to probe the F’-pocket of CD1d. Sci. Rep. 7, 4276 (2017).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jukes, J. P. et al. Non-glycosidic compounds can stimulate both human and mouse iNKT cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 46, 1224–1234 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Janssens, J. et al. Efficient divergent synthesis of new immunostimulant 4”-modified alpha-galactosylceramide analogues. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 8, 642–647 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chennamadhavuni, D. et al. Dual modifications of alpha-galactosylceramide synergize to promote activation of human invariant natural killer T cells and stimulate anti-tumor immunity. Cell Chem. Biol. 25, 925 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hartrampf, N. et al. Optical control of cytokine production using photoswitchable galactosylceramides. Chemistry 26, 4476–4479 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Saavedra-Avila, N. A. et al. Amide-linked C4”-saccharide modification of KRN7000 provides potent stimulation of human invariant NKT cells and anti-tumor immunity in a humanized mouse model. ACS Chem. Biol. 15, 3176–3186 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, X. et al. Design of a potent CD1d-binding NKT cell ligand as a vaccine adjuvant. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 13010–13015 (2010).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kakimi, K., Guidotti, L. G., Koezuka, Y. & Chisari, F. V. Natural killer T cell activation inhibits hepatitis B virus replication in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 192, 921–930 (2000).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fujii, S., Shimizu, K., Smith, C., Bonifaz, L. & Steinman, R. M. Activation of natural killer T cells by alpha-galactosylceramide rapidly induces the full maturation of dendritic cells in vivo and thereby acts as an adjuvant for combined CD4 and CD8 T cell immunity to a coadministered protein. J. Exp. Med. 198, 267–279 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hermans, I. F. et al. NKT cells enhance CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses to soluble antigen in vivo through direct interaction with dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 171, 5140–5147 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Paget, C. et al. Potential role of invariant NKT cells in the control of pulmonary inflammation and CD8+ T cell response during acute influenza A virus H3N2 pneumonia. J. Immunol. 186, 5590–5602 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Guillonneau, C. et al. Combined NKT cell activation and influenza virus vaccination boosts memory CTL generation and protective immunity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 3330–3335 (2009).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, C., Hong, S. N. & Kim, Y. H. A glycolipid adjuvant, 7DW8-5, provides a protective effect against colonic inflammation in mice by the recruitment of CD1d-restricted natural killer T cells. Intest. Res. 18, 402–411 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Leist, S. R. et al. A mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 induces acute lung injury and mortality in standard laboratory mice. Cell 183, 1070–1085.e1012 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Parekh, V. V. et al. Glycolipid antigen induces long-term natural killer T cell anergy in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 115, 2572–2583 (2005).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fujii, S., Shimizu, K., Kronenberg, M. & Steinman, R. M. Prolonged IFN-gamma-producing NKT response induced with alpha-galactosylceramide-loaded DCs. Nat. Immunol. 3, 867–874 (2002).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Courtney, A. N. et al. Intranasal but not intravenous delivery of the adjuvant alpha-galactosylceramide permits repeated stimulation of natural killer T cells in the lung. Eur. J. Immunol. 41, 3312–3322 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mori, M. et al. Generation of functional lungs via conditional blastocyst complementation using pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Med. 25, 1691–1698 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Halfmann, P. J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Omicron virus causes attenuated disease in mice and hamsters. Nature 603, 687–692 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ying, B. et al. Protective activity of mRNA vaccines against ancestral and variant SARS-CoV-2 strains. Sci. Transl. Med. 14, eabm3302 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Winkler, E. S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection of human ACE2-transgenic mice causes severe lung inflammation and impaired function. Nat. Immunol. 21, 1327–1335 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stokes, K. L. et al. Differential pathogenesis of respiratory syncytial virus clinical isolates in BALB/c mice. J. Virol. 85, 5782–5793 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Toapanta, F. R. & Ross, T. M. Impaired immune responses in the lungs of aged mice following influenza infection. Respir. Res. 10, 112 (2009).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shtrichman, R. & Samuel, C. E. The role of gamma interferon in antimicrobial immunity. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 4, 251–259 (2001).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Chong, Z. et al. Nasally delivered interferon-lambda protects mice against infection by SARS-CoV-2 variants including Omicron. Cell Rep. 39, 110799 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Georgiev, H., Ravens, I., Benarafa, C., Forster, R. & Bernhardt, G. Distinct gene expression patterns correlate with developmental and functional traits of iNKT subsets. Nat. Commun. 7, 13116 (2016).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shiratsuchi, T., Schneck, J., Kawamura, A. & Tsuji, M. Human CD1 dimeric proteins as indispensable tools for research on CD1-binding lipids and CD1-restricted T cells. J. Immunol. Methods 345, 49–59 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xie, X. et al. An Infectious cDNA Clone of SARS-CoV-2. Cell Host Microbe 27, 841–848.e843 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ravindra, N. G. et al. Single-cell longitudinal analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human airway epithelium identifies target cells, alterations in gene expression, and cell state changes. PLoS Biol. 19, e3001143 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, D. et al. Robust SARS-CoV-2 infection in nasal turbinates after treatment with systemic neutralizing antibodies. Cell Host Microbe 29, 551–563.e555 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Montoya, C. J. et al. Characterization of human invariant natural killer T subsets in health and disease using a novel invariant natural killer T cell-clonotypic monoclonal antibody, 6B11. Immunology 122, 1–14 (2007).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, Y. J. et al. Tissue-specific distribution of iNKT cells impacts their cytokine response. Immunity 43, 566–578 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Giaccone, G. et al. A phase I study of the natural killer T-cell ligand alpha-galactosylceramide (KRN7000) in patients with solid tumors. Clin. Cancer Res. 8, 3702–3709 (2002).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Nieda, M. et al. Therapeutic activation of Valpha24+Vbeta11+ NKT cells in human subjects results in highly coordinated secondary activation of acquired and innate immunity. Blood 103, 383–389 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Veldt, B. J. et al. Randomized placebo controlled phase I/II trial of alpha-galactosylceramide for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C. J. Hepatol. 47, 356–365 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Woltman, A. M. et al. Alpha-galactosylceramide in chronic hepatitis B infection: results from a randomized placebo-controlled Phase I/II trial. Antivir. Ther. 14, 809–818 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Padte, N. N. et al. A glycolipid adjuvant, 7DW8-5, enhances CD8+ T cell responses induced by an adenovirus-vectored malaria vaccine in non-human primates. PLoS ONE 8, e78407 (2013).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Markov, P.V. et al. The evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 21, 361–379 (2023).Dance, A. Omicron’s lasting mysteries: four questions scientists are racing to answer. Nature 603, 22–24 (2022).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wang, P. et al. Antibody resistance of SARS-CoV-2 variants B.1.351 and B.1.1.7. Nature 593, 130–135 (2021).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Antunes, M. B. et al. Murine nasal septa for respiratory epithelial air-liquid interface cultures. BioTechniques 43, 195–204 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Case, J. B., Bailey, A. L., Kim, A. S., Chen, R. E. & Diamond, M. S. Growth, detection, quantification, and inactivation of SARS-CoV-2. Virology 548, 39–48 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wetherall, N. T. et al. Evaluation of neuraminidase enzyme assays using different substrates to measure susceptibility of influenza virus clinical isolates to neuraminidase inhibitors: report of the neuraminidase inhibitor susceptibility network. J. Clin. Microbiol. 41, 742–750 (2003).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Eichelberger, M. C., Hassantoufighi, A., Wu, M. & Li, M. Neuraminidase activity provides a practical read-out for a high throughput influenza antiviral screening assay. Virol. J. 5, 109 (2008).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Van Hoecke, L., Job, E.R., Saelens, X. & Roose, K. Bronchoalveolar lavage of murine lungs to analyze inflammatory cell infiltration. J. Vis. Exp. 123, e55398 (2017).Chang, S. H. et al. T helper 17 cells play a critical pathogenic role in lung cancer. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 5664–5669 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stuart, T. & Satija, R. Integrative single-cell analysis. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 257–272 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis study was supported by funding to D.D.H. from the JPB Foundation, Andrew and Peggy Cherng, Samuel Yin, Carol Ludwig, David and Roger Wu. K18-hACE2 transgenic mouse and hamster experiments were conducted at Washington University with support from NIH: R01 AI157155 (to M.S.D), 75N93019C00051 (to M.S.D.), 75N93021C00016 (to A.C.M.B) and U01 AI151810 (to M.S.D and A.C.M.B).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Moriya Tsuji, Manoj S. Nair, Kazuya Masuda, Candace Castagna.Authors and AffiliationsAaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USAMoriya Tsuji, Manoj S. Nair, Kazuya Masuda, Yukiko Tsuji, Yaoxing Huang & David D. HoDivision of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USAMoriya Tsuji, Manoj S. Nair, Kazuya Masuda, Yaoxing Huang & David D. HoInstitute of Comparative Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USACandace Castagna & Laura CorredorDepartment of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USAZhenlu Chong, Tamarand L. Darling, Kuljeet Seehra, Adrianus C. M. Boon & Michael S. DiamondColumbia Center for Human Development, Pulmonary Allergy & Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032, USAYoungmin Hwang & Munemasa MoriBasic and Applied Virology Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, BrazilÁgata Lopes Ribeiro, Geovane Marques Ferreira & Jordana Grazziela Alves Coelho-dos-ReisDepartment of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USAAdrianus C. M. Boon & Michael S. DiamondDepartment of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USAAdrianus C. M. Boon & Michael S. DiamondThe Andrew M. and Jane M. Bursky Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USAMichael S. DiamondDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, 10032, USADavid D. HoAuthorsMoriya TsujiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarManoj S. NairView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKazuya MasudaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCandace CastagnaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZhenlu ChongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTamarand L. DarlingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKuljeet SeehraView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYoungmin HwangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarÁgata Lopes RibeiroView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGeovane Marques FerreiraView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLaura CorredorView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJordana Grazziela Alves Coelho-dos-ReisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYukiko TsujiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMunemasa MoriView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdrianus C. M. BoonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMichael S. DiamondView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYaoxing HuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDavid D. HoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsM.T., M.S.N., Y.T., Y.H., and D.D.H. conceived the project. M.T., C.C., L.C., and Z.C. performed the mouse experiments. T.L.D., and K.S. performed the hamster experiments. M.S.N., Z.C., T.L.D., K.S., and Y.H. performed the virus titration experiments. K.M. performed the single-cell analyses with 10X Genomics. Y.H. and M.M. performed the histological analysis. A.L.R., and G.M.F. contributed to the flow cytometric assay. M.T., M.S.N, K.M., J.G.A.C.-d.-R, Y.T., A.C.M.B, M.S.D and D.D.H. analyzed the results. M.T. and D.D.H. wrote the manuscript with contributions from each author.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Moriya Tsuji, Yaoxing Huang or David D. Ho.Ethics declarations Competing interests M.T., M.S.N, Y.H., and D.D.H. are listed as co-inventors on a provisional patent application filed by Columbia University for the treatment for COVID-19 and other viral respiratory infections using 7DW8-5 described in this manuscript. The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks David Markovitz, the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileReporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleTsuji, M., Nair, M.S., Masuda, K. et al. An immunostimulatory glycolipid that blocks SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza infections in vivo. Nat Commun 14, 3959 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39738-1Download citationReceived: 27 January 2023Accepted: 27 June 2023Published: 05 July 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39738-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Multi-viral defence in one sweep Agustina Taglialegna Nature Reviews Microbiology (2023) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchAvian influenza: Guidance if you have birds on farm – NFUonline Contact us NFU CallFirst Our offices NFU Cymru Media centre Join the NFU Log in About us About us NFU governance Who's who at the NFU Our history NFU Mutual insurance services NFU Cymru National Pig Association Careers Updates and information Updates and information Regions Sectors Cross sectors Events Campaigning Back British Farming Campaign resources NFU Education NFU reports Consultations Communities Services NFU Professional Services NFU CallFirst Business guides NFU planning services NFU Business Directory NFU Employment Service NFU energy solutions NFU Legal Services The NFU Tenants' Service Rewards Member rewards Business essentials NFU magazines Safety and security Training and resources Vehicles and machinery Wellbeing and lifestyle Home Updates and information Avian influenza – guidance if you have birds on your dairy or livestock farm Avian influenza – guidance if you have birds on your dairy or livestock farm 04 July 2023 Dairy Livestock Avian influenza Text only view Our poultry experts have put together this guidance for anyone who may have hens or other birds at home or on farm. Avian influenza H5N1 has been confirmed in captive birds, poultry and wild birds in England, Wales and Scotland. When cases are confirmed, the government will impose disease control zones around the infected premises. Mandatory housing measures for all poultry and captive birds were lifted from Tuesday 18 April 2023. Following the reduction in risk level to 'low' for all poultry, the nationwide Avian Influenza Prevention Zone (AIPZ) in place across Great Britain was lifted at noon on 4 July 2023. A ban on poultry gatherings remains in place. The NFU urges all poultry keepers to remain vigilant for signs of disease and to maintain stringent biosecurity measures. Poultry keepers (even if they just have one hen in the garden) should check whether they are within an avian influenza disease control zone by using the APHA’s interactive map as restrictions will apply. You can also use our AI case finder to find current and lifted cases of avian influenza at any particular location. It is being updated regularly with information on the latest cases, including the restrictions that apply in the Disease Control Zones around the infected premises. Nationwide Avian Influenza Prevention Zone in Great Britain lifted 04 July 202304 July 2023 What if I am in a disease control zone? Additional restrictions apply to all poultry keepers within disease control zones. Licences may be required for movements on and off sites that have poultry or captive birds on them. If any part of a holding is within a disease control zone then the whole holding is considered to be within that disease control zone. Licences may be required for movements of livestock, pigs and horses on or off a holding within a disease control zone that also has poultry on it, even if it’s just a few hens in the garden. A general licence has been issued for the movement of mammals (including livestock) from or to premises in the Protection or Surveillance Zone in England or Wales where poultry and other captive birds are kept (please note that any mammals moved under this licence must have no access to and been kept separate from poultry and any other captive birds for a minimum of 21 days). In order to use the general licence, you must follow all of the requirements listed within the licence. The full list of general licences can be found on the government website. If there are no poultry or captive birds on both the holding where the movement starts and the holding where it ends then movement licences are not required (unless either site is under individual restriction). You can find out if you are in a disease control zone by using the APHA’s interactive map. Get information on the restrictions that apply in avian influenza disease control zones. Consequences of avian influenza – what will happen if my birds get AI? In the event of avian influenza being confirmed in your flock, any surviving birds will be culled. You only receive compensation from the government for any healthy birds (birds showing no signs or symptoms of the disease at the time of culling) at the value of the birds immediately before culling. Your holding will also be placed under strict restrictions, affecting all movements on and off the site, including but not limited to people, livestock, bedding, feed and manure. As the infected premises, you would also be responsible for carrying out and paying for secondary cleansing and disinfection which may have significant financial implications. This is also linked to when the UK can regain official disease-free status for avian influenza from the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). Not being able to carry out secondary cleansing and disinfection or a delay in completion can have serious implications on our international trade in poultry meat, eggs and breeding chicks. What are the risks of avian influenza to humans? The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has said that the risk to the general public’s health is very low and the Food Standards Agency has said that avian influenza poses a very low food safety risk for UK consumers. Properly cooked poultry and poultry products are safe to eat. All the information relating to the latest confirmed cases of AI in the UK plus guidance and advice for poultry keepers can be found in our AI hub. If you can’t find the information you need on this page, please contact NFU CallFirst on 0370 845 8458. Animal health Ask us a question about this page Once you have submitted your query someone from NFU CallFirst will contact you. If needed, your query will then be passed to the appropriate NFU policy team. Name * Membership number Telephone number * Email address * Enquiry * You have 0 characters remaining. Submit By completing the form with your details on this page, you are agreeing to have this information sent to the NFU for the purposes of contacting you regarding your enquiry. Please take time to read the NFU’s Privacy Policy if you require further information. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Müller acquisition of Yew Tree Dairy 11 November 202411 November 2024 AI case finder – current and lifted cases of avian influenza Consultation Proposed changes to marketing regulations for poultry meat 01 November 202401 November 2024 Open until 16 December 2024 International Summit: The Societal Role of Meat & Livestock 01 November 202401 November 2024 Get your discounted festive merchandise now 29 October 202429 October 2024 About the NFU About the NFU Advertise with the NFU NFU Careers NFU Membership The NFU 2023 financial statement Media centre More NFU sites More NFU sites Back British Farming British Agriculture Bureau CFE Online Countryside Online Great British Chicken NFU Cymru NFU Sugar Tried and Tested TB Free England UK Turkeys Member services Member services NFU CallFirst NFU Contract Checking Service CT Planning Farm Safety: Risk Management NFU Legal Assistance Scheme (LAS) NFU Employment Service NFU Energy NFU Rural Surveyor Firms The NFU Tenants' Service Follow Us Follow Us The NFU on social media X (Twitter) Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Back British Farming on social media Facebook Instagram TikTok © 2024 – NFUonline NFUonline terms and conditions NFU mobile app terms and conditions Anti‑slavery and human trafficking statement Privacy policy Cookies policy Complaints procedure NFU terms and conditions NFU gender pay gap reports NFU staff pension scheme 10204 Accept essential cookies Accept all cookies Manage preferences‘Rollercoaster of a sickness’: how a horror flu season is catching Australian families off guard | Health | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/1Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal development Two-year-old Billie Smith who fell unwell with the flu on the way home to Sydney from a family holiday in Fiji. Health authorities are urging parents to get their children vaccinatedView image in fullscreenTwo-year-old Billie Smith who fell unwell with the flu on the way home to Sydney from a family holiday in Fiji. Health authorities are urging parents to get their children vaccinatedHealth This article is more than 1 year old‘Rollercoaster of a sickness’: how a horror flu season is catching Australian families off guardThis article is more than 1 year oldAbout 69% of people admitted to hospital with confirmed influenza since April are aged under 16 Flu cases are on the rise across Australia. Do I need a winter vaccination? Follow our Australia news live blog for the latest updates Get our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast Jordyn BeazleyThu 6 Jul 2023 16.00 BSTLast modified on Thu 6 Jul 2023 23.12 BSTShareFeverish and lethargic, Emily Smith’s two-year-old daughter could barely open her eyes on the plane ride home from a family holiday in January.In fear, she took Billie to hospital right after their plane landed in Sydney, at the beginning of what has become a horror flu season.“It wasn’t until we got her to the hospital and they told me it was the flu,” Smith said. “It definitely opened my eyes to how sick it can make them.”Flu cases spike: Australian parents urged to vaccinate children after steep rise in hospital admissionsRead moreSince her daughter’s illness, reported influenza cases have surged among children, particularly among those aged between five and nine, according to the latest national surveillance data.About 69% of people admitted to hospital with confirmed influenza since April are children aged below 16. Yet just 22% of children aged between six months to five years – and 13% of children aged five to 16 – are vaccinated against influenza nationally. This compares with 61% of those aged 65 and above.More than 137,000 infections have been recorded across the country this year, as of 3 July, with the highest numbers being reported in New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup Dr Sarah McNab, the director of general medicine at the Royal Children’s hospital in Melbourne, said the rise was likely due to flu patterns returning to normal after the Covid-19 pandemic and the ease with which the contagious virus spreads in childcare centres and schools.“We now have all of the respiratory illnesses circulating in the community again,” she said.In the past month, she said the hospital had seen a rise in the numbers of children presenting with the flu. The most common symptoms include lethargy, aches and pains, fever and a runny nose.But the severity of flu cases for children has also spiked, with some admitted to intensive care with serious heart, brain and muscle-related complications.Prof Nicholas Wood, a University of Sydney paediatrics expert, said it was not yet clear why the severity of cases had gotten worse.The severity of infections among children prompted the NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, to urge parents to get their children vaccinated.“Sadly, our children’s hospitals are seeing an increasing number of these children being admitted for care and some of these patients are seriously unwell,” she said on Thursday.The vaccine is recommended annually for anyone older than six months. High-risk groups can also access the vaccination for free, including children aged under five, pregnant women, people aged 65 and above, Aboriginal people, and those with serious health conditions.skip past newsletter promotionSign up to Afternoon UpdateFree daily newsletterOur Australian afternoon update breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it mattersEnter your email address Sign upPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.after newsletter promotionAustralia faces another record flu season – and children’s vaccination rates are alarming | Asha Bowen and Christopher BlythRead moreSmith said she had not yet thought to get Billie vaccinated because she did not realise how the flu could affect children.“We’ll be getting the vaccine every year now,” she said.Billie’s symptoms lasted about 10 days, with the girl appearing to get better one day before her symptoms got worse the next. She spent 12 hours in the Sydney Children’s hospital right after they returned from Fiji, while staff ran tests.“It was a really weird rollercoaster of a sickness,” she said.Prof Julie Leask, a University of Sydney immunisation expert, said there were many reasons why the vaccination rate remains low despite the risk to children.“It can be parents not being aware of the recommendations, not wanting that extra needle, or not seeing the flu as serious as it can be,” she said. “It can also be health professionals not flagging the need, or being in the habit of recommending it, or seeing other forms of treatment or prevention as a priority.”She said it was important for parents to realise that it was not too late to get the flu vaccine for their children.“The flu season is still not over and in our research we’ve talked to parents who were just about to get the vaccine, then didn’t, and then their child got the flu and went to hospital,” she said.Explore more on these topicsHealthFluVaccines and immunisationnewsShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal developmentNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital Maldives recognized as a National Influenza Centre (NIC) by World Health Organization Skip to main content Global Regions WHO Regional websites Africa Americas South-East Asia Europe Eastern Mediterranean Western Pacific Countries Countries in the WHO South-East Asia Region: Bangladesh Bhutan Democratic People’s Republic of Korea India Indonesia Maldives Myanmar Nepal Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. South-East Asia Maldives Home Health topics Our work News Emergencies About us Home/ News/ Detail/ Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital Maldives recognized as a National Influenza Centre (NIC) by World Health Organization Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital Maldives recognized as a National Influenza Centre (NIC) by World Health Organization 2 July 2023 Note for Media Maldives Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital (IGMH) Maldives has received recognition by WHO as a National Influenza Centre and subsequently a member of the WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS). A National Influenza Centre recognized by WHO will maintain direct working relations with the WHO Global Influenza Programme and WHO Regional Offices as well as WHO Collaborating Centers for Reference and Research on Influenza and will comply with the Terms of Reference for National Influenza Centers. Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital (IGMH) is a publicly funded hospital in the capital of Malé, Maldives and is the largest healthcare facility in country. Its primary function is to provide high quality tertiary level healthcare services to around 150,000 people living in the capital city and specialist referral services. IGMH houses modern investigative and imaging technologies in diagnostics, providing efficient patient-centered healthcare.In the year 2013, the Health Protection Agency (HPA), Ministry of Health Maldives acquired support from US-Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to develop an active influenza surveillance system which included laboratory capacity development to routinely test for influenza. Since then, IGMH has been supporting Health Protection Agency with the laboratory detection of Influenza viruses. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the influenza laboratory was further upgraded into a molecular testing facility for SARS CoV-2, with several automated equipment being installed and utilized. Currently, the influenza laboratory is adequately spaced and is compliant to the workflow required for PCR testing. Throughout the years, WHO has continued to support IGMH with many trainings and provide laboratory consumables and reagents required for Influenza and COVID-19 preparedness, enabling testing and quality diagnostics in the Maldives and supporting External Quality Assessment Panels for quality management and trainings for the laboratory staff. WHO has also been a collaborative partner when Maldives had Influenza outbreaks in the years 2017 and 2018, in addition to the ongoing support to Maldives for the COVID-19 pandemic.As the national referral center, IGMH provides a first line of defense in rapid recognition and prevention of communicable disease through the surveillance system lead by Health Protection Agency and provides laboratory support for outbreak investigations and health emergencies. It also serves as a national center for infectious diseases by providing laboratory capacity for identification of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, enteric and invasive diseases, vector borne diseases, respiratory diseases of public health importance, and early detection and confirmation of measles, rubella and HIV. Ministry of Health expressed interest to WHO to officially designate Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital as a National Influenza Centre. This was deemed an excellent opportunity to review the existing Maldives surveillance program as part of the NIC laboratory assessment, which was completed in March 2023. The aim of this review was to follow up on the gaps identified during previous assessments and evaluate the status of the laboratory in achieving the requirements to meet the WHO NIC Terms of Reference and become a WHO recognized NIC and a full member of GISRS. The assessment of laboratories requesting WHO-recognition occurs through a process involving self-assessments using a standardized tool known as NIC-Laboratory Assessment Tool (NIC-LAT) and on-site visits by experts. The LAT evaluates the laboratories’ influenza-related work as well as laboratory quality to ensure influenza laboratories are operating at similar high standards of performance. This tool has been widely used by public health laboratories globally and is considered an efficient tool for putting in place a quality system which will help the laboratory to meet quality standards. IGMH underwent a detailed onsite Influenza Laboratory Capacity assessment by WHO Southeast Asia Regional Office using the WHO NIC LAT Tool. The recommendations of this assessment helped IGMH to build on their strengths in preparation for the NIC recognition. The assessment was performed by experts from NICs of Sri Lanka and Bhutan, WHO Collaborating Center in Melbourne, US-CDC-India and WHO SEARO. Within the course of three and a half days (from 5th to 8th of March 2023), the team of experts met with the HPA and IGMH teams and performed the assessment, which included a series of questions accompanied by visits to different sections of the Influenza Laboratory. Advice and recommendations were made following the initial observations and examinations of the different documents. Remarkably, the National influenza Laboratory scored 90% across the general indicators and exceeded the recommended score of 85% or over to become a WHO recognized NIC. As a result, the WHO Southeast Asia Regional Office recommended the nomination of the National Influenza Laboratory at Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital (IGMH) to be recognized by WHO as the National Influenza Centre. “One of the most important lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic is the need for enhanced laboratory capacities to detect diseases quickly and accurately. This is a building block of pandemic preparedness and response, and as WHO, we have prioritized this well.” said Dr Nazneen Anwar. WHO Representative, “I take this opportunity to congratulate National Influenza Laboratory Team at Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital (IGMH), headed by Dr. Shimal Thasneem on the well-deserved recognition they have received. This achievement increases the Maldives capacity towards responding to multiple respiratory pathogens of pandemic potential. Multisectoral partnership and country ownership are vital for ensuring sustainability of National Influenza programmes, which serve as an investment for greater health system strengthening pandemic preparedness and building back better.”WHO recommends continued support to the NIC by the Government of Maldives and encourage Maldives to continue to contribute to regional and global influenza surveillance and enhancing its involvement in GISRS to further sustaining this achievement. WHO remains committed towards providing continued technical advice, assistance, and training to the National Influenza Center. Quick links Media centre Publications and information resources Careers in WHO Maldives Regional links Data Publications Campaigns Help Contact us Integrity Hotline Privacy Legal Notice © 2024 WHOIn vitro and in silico studies of the antiviral activity of polyhydrated fullerenes against influenza A (H1N1) virus | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article In vitro and in silico studies of the antiviral activity of polyhydrated fullerenes against influenza A (H1N1) virus Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 05 July 2023 In vitro and in silico studies of the antiviral activity of polyhydrated fullerenes against influenza A (H1N1) virus Polina Zaremba1, Andrii Zaremba1, Krystyna Naumenko1, Mykhailo Yelipashev2 & …Svitlana Zahorodnia1 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 13, Article number: 10879 (2023) Cite this article 1727 Accesses 3 Citations 3 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects AntiviralsInfluenza virus AbstractAs of today, influenza viruses remain a relevant target for the development of antiviral compounds due to their rapid evolution and acquisition of the resistance to existing drugs. Fullerene derivatives have already shown the ability to successfully interact with viruses, and polyhydrated fullerenes (or fullerenols) are particularly attractive due to their compatibility with biological fluids and low toxicity. Therefore, the goal of this work was to study the effect of two batches of a mixture of polyhydrated fullerenes with a mass ratio of 78.1% C60/C70 and 21.9% C76/C78/C84 on the influenza A (H1N1) virus. It was determined that the mixture of fullerenols, along with the low toxicity, showed high antiviral activity with a decrease in the viral infectious titer up to 4 orders of magnitude. In addition, studied fullerenols did not affect the hemagglutination process and did not show any significant prophylactic activity. With the help of molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation, the likely target of fullerenols' action was determined—the binding site of the RNA primer of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Therefore, we assume that the high antiviral effect of polyhydrated fullerenes on influenza A virus is related to their interaction with the viral RNA polymerase. Similar content being viewed by others C60 fullerene against SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus: an in silico insight Article Open access 07 September 2021 A computational study of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as potential nanostructures to combat SARS-CoV-2 Article Open access 20 September 2022 Inhibitory effects of aprotinin on influenza A and B viruses in vitro and in vivo Article Open access 03 May 2021 IntroductionHumanity has "officially" coexisted with influenza viruses for more than a century and, most likely, much longer. Since 1918, five pandemics have already been registered, three of them were caused by influenza A (H1N1) virus1. It has firmly established itself as an annual cause of acute respiratory viral infections and is especially dangerous for certain vulnerable categories of the population, such as elderly people over 65 years old, immunocompromised individuals, pregnant women, children, and people with chronic diseases. Antiviral drugs are very necessary for this part of the world's population. Thus, the root of the problem is that influenza viruses quickly mutate and acquire resistance to drugs due to the peculiarities of their structure and, as a result, the phenomena of the antigenic drift and the reassortment2. To date, we have already abandoned the use of the adamantanes (inhibitors of the viral proton pump M2) due to the high resistance of influenza A virus strains (more than 69% of H1 subtypes)3. Currently, neuraminidase inhibitors are almost the only globally widespread type of anti-influenza drugs, of which oseltamivir and zanamivir are the most often used, including usage in Ukraine. Resistance of the H1N1 strain to oseltamivir increased dramatically before the start of the 2009 pandemic, although H1N1 pdm09 itself was mostly (> 98.5%) susceptible to neuraminidase inhibitors. As of today, influenza A virus remains susceptible to oseltamivir and zanamivir, but their use increases a frequency of mutations responsible for the resistance4. Therefore, the search for new drugs is constantly ongoing, but due to the complex and long-term development process, their number grows very slowly. Baloxavir marboxil, a cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor of influenza virus, was the last to enter the pharmaceutical market, but it was approved for treatment and prevention only in people over 12 years of age5. Moreover, the situation with SARS-CoV-2 and a phenomenon of its co-infection with influenza viruses acutely demonstrate the need for antiviral agents with different mechanisms of action.The need for safe drugs that can be used for all vulnerable categories remains, and recently scientists have paid more attention to nanomaterials, which have found wide application not only in the medical field. Unique carbon nanostructures—fullerenes—attract the attention of many scientists and specialists, primarily because of their chemical and physical properties, such as size, symmetry, stability, three-dimensionality and electronic configurations. As of today, there are already confirmations of the effect of fullerenes and their derivatives on HIV6, hepatitis C virus7, influenza A virus8, herpesviruses9, as well as an in silico studies of the effect on SARS-CoV-210.The main problem of using fullerenes in biology and medicine is high hydrophobicity, and, as a result, very low solubility in water11. However, this problem is solved by modifications of the molecule. To date, hydrated fullerenes or fullerenols with the general formula Cn(OH)x are sufficiently well studied12. The formation of soluble fullerenes makes it possible to combine them with liquids, including physiological ones (blood, lymph), which expands the range of applications13. In addition, hydrated fullerenes are stable and have relatively low toxicity, which undoubtedly makes them attractive candidates for the role of drugs, in particular, antiviral agents. That is why the aim of our work was to study the effect of two forms of the mixture of polyhydrated fullerenes K050 and K400 on the influenza A (H1N1) virus.ResultsBased on the results obtained after the MTT assay, CC50 indicators (50% cytotoxic concentration) were calculated. For HyFn400 and for the reference-drug oseltamivir the indicators were 11.79 ± 0.58 mg/ml and 0.29 ± 0.01 mg/ml, respectively. HyFn050 at its maximum concentration of 2.5 mg/ml did not show any toxic effect on cells. Accordingly, due to the absence of toxicity it was impossible to calculate CC50 for the latter.Antiviral activity and determination of infectious titer de novoThe results of the calculation of the antiviral activity showed a clear dose-dependent inhibitory effect for the studied polyhydrated fullerenes (Fig. 1A,C). We observed the greatest activity at the highest tested concentrations: HyFn050 (1.5 mg/ml) inhibited H1N1 reproduction by 34.07 ± 1.70%, and HyFn400 (5 mg/ml) by 96.48 ± 4.82%. Oseltamivir at a concentration of 0.15 mg/ml showed the result of 22.33 ± 1.11% antiviral activity.Figure 1The effect of hydrated fullerenes on the reproduction process of influenza A (H1N1) virus and its infectious titer: (A) The antiviral activity of HyFn050 according to the post-exposure administration scheme; (B) The value of infectious titers de novo in TCID50 (log10) in the supernatant after determining the antiviral activity of HyFn050; (C) The antiviral activity of HyFn400 according to the post-exposure administration scheme; (D) The value of infectious titers de novo in TCID50 (log10) in the supernatant after determining the antiviral activity of HyFn400; Ref oseltamivir phosphate; IAV virus control.Full size imageDetermination of the infectious titer of the virus after the antiviral activity study of the fullerenols (that is, in the cell supernatant) showed its decrease in general by 2–4 orders of magnitude. The HyFn400 mixture showed a decrease in the infectious titer at all tested concentrations (Fig. 1D). The greatest drop in the infectious titer by 4.02 orders of magnitude was observed at a concentration of 2.5 mg/ml compared to the virus control (TCID50 = 1010.61). HyFn050 showed an effect on the TCID50 value only at the highest tested concentration of 1.5 mg/ml: a decrease of 2.13 orders of magnitude at the TCID50 of the virus control of 107.65 (Fig. 1B). The activity of oseltamivir at a concentration of 0.15 mg/ml was manifested in a decrease in the infectious titer of the virus by 3.14 orders of magnitude compared to the control (TCID50 = 1010.61) (Fig. 1D).Prophylactic activity and determination of infectious titer de novoDuring 24 h of incubation with cells before influenza infection, hydrated fullerenes did not show high prophylactic activity. HyFn050 and oseltamivir did not affect the inhibition of the infection process at all (Fig. 2A). Fullerenols HyFn400 demonstrated a slight prophylactic activity at the lowest tested concentration of 0.5 mg/ml with the result of 4.00 ± 0.20% (Fig. 2C).Figure 2The prophylactic effect of hydrated fullerenes on the process of influenza virus infection: (A) Indicators of the prophylactic activity for HyFn050; (B) The value of infectious titers de novo in the supernatant after determining the prophylactic effect of HyFn050; (C) Indicators of the prophylactic activity for HyFn400; (D) The value of infectious titers de novo in the supernatant after determining the prophylactic effect of HyFn400; Ref oseltamivir phosphate; IAV virus control.Full size imageThe calculation of the infectious titer after the prophylactic activity study of the compounds showed the following effect of fullerenols. HyFn0400 showed a slight decrease in the TCID50 value by 0.89 orders of magnitude compared to the virus control (TCID50 = 107.59) at a concentration of 2.5 mg/ml (Fig. 2D). Similar activity was observed for HyFn050: in the concentration range of 0.05–1.5 mg/ml, the infectious titer decreased by an average of 0.9 orders of magnitude, compared to the virus control (TCID50 = 107.52) (Fig. 2B). And oseltamivir at a concentration of 0.15 mg/ml showed a decrease in titer by 0.75 orders of magnitude (Fig. 2B).Hemagglutination inhibition reactionPreviously, before the HIR (hemagglutination inhibition reaction) with hydrated fullerenes, the titer of the virus was determined using the hemagglutination reaction, which was 64 HAU/25 μl. The ability of the studied structures to directly affect erythrocytes in the concentration range of 0.01–10 mg/ml for HyFn400, 0.01–1.25 mg/ml for HyFn050 and 0.015–0.15 mg/ml for oseltamivir was also tested. Neither compound was found to cause agglutination of the erythrocytes. The HIR was carried out in the same range of concentrations. The results showed that hydrated fullerenes and oseltamivir do not affect the ability of the influenza A (H1N1) virus to agglutinate guinea pig erythrocytes.Molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulationAccording to the molecular docking, the RdRp/fullerenol complex, where the latter partially covered the site of interaction of the primer viral RNA (vRNA) was characterized by the best evaluation score (− 6.7 kcal/mol). In Fig. 3B amino acids that directly interact with C60(OH)60 are highlighted in pink: R279, K281, Y393, S395, D396, P398, V517, R566, N568, G569, T570, S571, K574, A651, S652, P653, N696—PA (polymerase acidic protein); D27, Y30, H32, R238—PB1 (polymerase basic protein 1). In Fig. 3A, these amino acids are also highlighted. Together with others, they participate in the interaction of the hook structure of the 5′-promoter with RdRp.Figure 3The RdRp of H1N1 in complex with primer RNA (A) and C60(OH)60 (B). Amino acids that directly surround a fullerenol during its interaction with viral polymerase are highlighted in pink. It can be clearly seen that the same amino acids are directly involved in the interaction of H1N1 RdRp with vRNA.Full size imageThe molecular dynamics of polyhydrated C60 in the complex with H1N1 RdRp was relatively homogeneous and was characterized by a stable preservation of the ligand position throughout the simulation period. The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of C60(OH)60 during the first 20 ns of the simulation stabilized at a value of ~ 3 Å and remained until the end of the simulation with the exception of minor fluctuations (Fig. 4). The range of RMSD fluctuations was about 1 Å. That, together with the constant preservation of the general level of RMSD, may indicate the sufficient stability of the studied ligand in the complex with RdRp.Figure 4The root-mean-square deviation of the ligand-receptor complex and the root-mean-square fluctuation of RdRp PA subunit. At the beginning of the simulation, the average RMSD value of C60(OH)60 quickly reached its maximum at ~ 3 Å, and after that stabilized. And the mentioned value remained until the end of the simulation with the exception of minor oscillations. At the same time, the amplitude of the RMSD of fullerenol is ~ 1 Å. The RMSF of RdRp PA showed a high degree of stability of most of the amino acids involved in the interaction with C60(OH)60. Residues Y393, S395, D396, and P398 are exceptions because they are a part of the highly labile disordered loop.Full size imageThe root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF) distribution of amino acids of the RdRp PA subunit showed mostly its minimum value for amino acids involved in the interaction with polyhydrated C60. Only Y393, S395, D396, and P398 had a high RMSF. However, it should be noted that these amino acids are a part of the disordered and labile loop that directly interacts with the solvent during simulation.Among the main orienting interactions, hydrogen bonds of C60(OH)60 with amino group K281 and carbonyl G569 (which are a part of PA subunit) should be highlighted. These connections are stable enough to be observed throughout the simulation. Additional hydrogen bonds with: R279, S395, D396, R566, G569, T570 and S571—PA, H32 and R238—PB1 were also present in some periods of the simulation. In general, the number of hydrogen bonds between the ligand and the receptor ranged from 2 to 3 during the simulation (Fig. 5) and after some rare jumps up to 6–7.Figure 5The number of hydrogen bonds between C60(OH)60 and RdRp. On average, it varies between 2–3.Full size imageThe value of the interaction enthalpy between C60(OH)60 and RdRp, calculated on the basis of the molecular modeling trajectory, was sufficiently significant and equaled to − 129.55 ± 14.52 kcal/mol. That indicates a potentially high gain of the system in case of successful formation of the RdRp/C60(OH)60 complex. Moreover, the contribution of both van der Waals and electrostatic energy to the ligand-receptor interaction were close and provided the basis for the stability of the formed associate: − 61.88 ± 7.62 kcal/mol and − 58.59 ± 18.71 kcal/mol, respectively. A much smaller contribution was provided by solvation free energy – 9.08 kcal/mol. In Table 1, it is represented by polar (− 0.58 ± 19.65 kcal/mol) and non-polar (-8.5 ± 1.14 kcal/mol) components. According to the fact that the entropy penalty was equal to 55.85 ± 0.25 kcal/mol, the final free energy of formation of the C60(OH)60/RdRp complex was − 73.7 ± 14.52 kcal/mol.Table 1 Energy components of the final free energy of interaction.Full size tableDiscussionStudies of the activity of polyhydrated fullerenes against influenza A (H1N1) virus indicate their ability to influence the process of the virus reproduction. Considering the lack of interaction with the hemagglutinin according to the results of the hemagglutination inhibition reaction, we assume that HyFn050 and HyFn400 do not interact directly with surface structures of the virus particle. Also, under the prophylactic scheme of the study, mixtures of fullerenols did not show a significant activity with a decrease in the infectious titer by less than 1 order of magnitude. Considering this, we believe that the studied pohydrated fullerenes do not have an immunomodulatory effect at the cellular level similar to interferon-inducing antiviral compounds14.Hydrated fullerenes HyFn050 and HyFn400 demonstrated the greatest effect on influenza virus reproduction after the establishment of infection in MDCK cells. We assume that a high dose-dependent antiviral effect, together with a decrease in the infectious titer up to 4 orders of magnitude, may be due to the interaction of fullerenes with influenza structures during the reproduction of the latter in the cell.Some studies indirectly testify to the significant role of charge distribution on the surface of a fullerene in this process. In particular, Kataoka et al.7 demonstrated the ability of fullerene derivatives to inhibit RNA polymerase and protease of hepatitis C virus. At the same time, the C60 fullerene derivative which contained an additional carboxyl group showed three times greater activity against polymerase compared to protease. And Shoji et al.8 proved the ability of fullerene derivatives to inhibit the activity of the PA subunit of RdRp of influenza A H1N1 and H3N2 in their study. In this case, derivatives of C60 with a small negatively charged substituent on the surface showed a stronger inhibitory effect compared to derivatives with more massive and/or positively charged substituents. Therefore, we can assume that the presence of a small negatively charged substituent on the surface of C60 fullerenes may be an important factor for effective inhibition of viral RNA polymerases. The mixture studied in our work (C60/C70/C76/C78/C84)(OH)40 contains fullerenes of different sizes, but with a similarly hydrated surface. Each of the carbon atoms was bonded to one hydroxyl group and three other carbon atoms. Thus, the polyhydrated fullerenes that appear in our work had a relatively homogeneous surface lined with highly electronegative oxygen atoms. Taking into account the above-mentioned studies and the results obtained by us, we assume that the drug forms of fullerenols K050 and K400, represented by two batches HyFn050 and HyFn400, can have an inhibitory effect on the activity of the RdRp of the influenza A virus. In addition, the high hydrophilicity of the surface makes it difficult for fullerenols to pass through the cell membrane, which explains the activity at high concentrations and the dose-dependent effect.In order to understand the direct mechanisms underlying the interaction between the RdRp of influenza A virus and the investigated hydrated fullerenes, molecular docking was performed. According to its results it was determined that the most likely site of fullerenol binding is the pocket of RdRp interaction with the RNA primer, more precisely, with the hook structure of its 5′-end15. In our opinion, this is logical because the charge distribution on the nucleic acid surface can be considered similar to the charge distribution on the surface of hydrated fullerenes. A further simulation study confirmed the high affinity of C60(OH)60 to the previously identified pocket. The RMSD of the ligand and the drop in the free energy of the system are the first evidence. The RMSD of hydrated C60 quickly stabilizes within ~ 3 Å (range of oscillations ~ 1 Å). Which, according to modern data, is included in the RMSD optimum for a ligand in a complex with its potential receptor16. At the same time, the significantly negative value of the binding free energy (− 73.7 ± 14.52 kcal/mol) indicates the high stability of the RdRp/C60(OH)60 complex. This is also confirmed by the low RMSF value characteristic of RdRp PA amino acids interacting with the ligand. The only exceptions are amino acids Y393, S395, D396 and P398. However, they are included in the highly labile disordered part of the PA-subunit, which, moreover, directly interacts with the solvent. Therefore, they can be considered as an exception in this case.The main forces stabilizing the studied complex are hydrogen bonds, as well as a steric compatibility. This is reflected in the calculated high values of both van der Waals interactions and electrostatic energy as the main components of the enthalpy of the system. The interaction of C60(OH)60 with PA K281 and G569 was the most stable: all analyzed frames of the trajectory contained them. The formation of additional interactions with many of the above-described amino acid residues was also observed locally. Thus, the average number of hydrogen bonds fluctuated around 2–3, although significant excesses of this number were also observed.In general, the placement of C60(OH)60 in the binding site of the 5′-end of the RNA primer, as well as its affinity to this site, in our opinion, may be related to its previously determined biological properties.ConclusionsThe studied batches of the mixture of polyhydrated fullerenes K050 and K400 have an antiviral effect against influenza A (H1N1) virus, which is manifested in the suppression of viral reproduction by a maximum of > 94% and a decrease in the infectious titer de novo by 4 orders of magnitude. Since in the simulation experiment C60(OH)60 demonstrated a significant level of affinity to RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, in particular to the binding site of the RNA primer, we assume that the described effect is due to the interaction of the studied structures with the viral RNA polymerase. Therefore, we believe that this drug is promising for further research as an antiviral agent.Materials and methodsMaterialsMDCK cell culture and influenza A (H1N1) virus strain A/FM/1/47 were used for the study. Both were obtained from the L.V. Gromashevsky Institute of Epidemiology and Infectious Diseases of the National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine.The drug of Ukrainian production in two forms K050 and K400 ((C60/C70/C76/C78/C84)(OH)40) is an aqueous colloidal solution of a polyhydrated mixture of fullerenes with a mass ratio of 78.1% C60/C70 and 21.9% C76/C78/C84. The forms of the drug differ in the initial concentration. Two batches with different concentrations were tested: HyFn050 2.5 mg/ml (FN1120CSMP4K050) and HyFn400 20 mg/ml (FN1120CSMP5K400). Oseltamivir phosphate (Macleods Pharmaceuticals LTD) was used as a reference drug.Cultivation of MDCKMDCK cell culture was grown in sterile flasks (Sarstedt, Germany) on a growth medium: 46% DMEM (Sigma, USA), 46% RPMI 1640 (Sigma, USA), 8% fetal bovine serum inactivated by heating at 56 °C (Sigma, USA) and 10 μl/ml penicillin streptomycin solution (Biowest, France). Cells were subcultivated at ratio of 1:10 every 48 h. For this 0.025% Trypsin–EDTA solution (Biowest, France) and 0.02% Versene solution (Biowest, France) were used, then cells were resuspended in growth medium. Cells were incubated in a thermostat at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2.Determination of cytotoxicityThe cytotoxicity was determined using the MTT assay. The supernatant was removed from a 96-well plate (SPL Life Sciences, Republic of Korea) with a monolayer of MDCK cells and the test compounds diluted in the growth medium were added to the wells in the concentration range from 5 to 20 mg/ml for HyFn400, from 0.25 to 2.5 mg/ml for HyFn050, and from 0.01 to 1 mg/ml for oseltamivir. The compounds were incubated together with the cells for 48 h in a thermostat at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After that MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide, neoFroxx, Germany) was dissolved in the sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH = 7.4) to the concentration of 5 mg/ml and added to the wells in volume of 20 μl. The plate was incubated for 3 h and, after removing the supernatant, 150 μl of 96% ethyl alcohol was added. The optical density was measured on a Multiskan FC reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at the wavelength of 538 nm.Antiviral activityFor a post-exposure scheme of introduction a 96-well plate (SPL Life Sciences, Republic of Korea) with a monolayer of cells was washed with 150 μl of PBS (pH = 7.4). 50 μl of virus suspension (TCID50/ml = 108,84) in PRMI 1640 medium (Sigma, USA) was added to the washed wells and incubated for 90 min in a thermostat at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After that, the supernatant was removed from the wells and 200 μl of compounds diluted in the supporting medium were added: 49% DMEM (Sigma, USA), 49% RPMI 1640 (Sigma, USA), 2% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, USA) and 1 μl/ml TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma, USA). 200 μl of the supporting medium was added to the wells with the controls. The plate was incubated for 48 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. After detection of cytopathic effect (CPE, granular destruction of the monolayer) the supernatant was removed, 50 μl of crystal violet dye (neoFroxx, Germany) 5 mg/ml in 19.2% ethanol 96% solution was added and incubated on a shaker for 10 min. After washing, the plate was left for 24 h at a room temperature to dry, then 150 μl of 96% ethanol was added. The optical density was measured at the wavelength of 538 nm on a Multiskan FC reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The indicator of the antiviral activity of compounds (%) was calculated according to the following formula:$${\text{Antiviral activity }} = \, \left( {{\text{A}} - {\text{B}}} \right)/\left( {{\text{C}} - {\text{B}}} \right)*{1}00\%$$ (1) where A—an optical density of a studied concentration of a compound, B—an optical density of a control of a virus, C—an optical density of a control of the cells.Prophylactic activityFirst, 50 μl/well of the studied compounds, diluted in a growth medium (46% DMEM (Sigma, USA), 46% RPMI 1640 (Sigma, USA), 8% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, USA) and 10 μl/ml penicillin streptomycin solution (Biowest, France), were added to the monolayer of cells in a 96-well plate (SPL Life Sciences, Republic of Korea) and left for incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h. Next, the plate was washed with PBS (pH = 7.4) and 50 μl of virus suspension was added and incubated for 90 min (37 °C, 5% CO2). After that, the supernatant was removed from the wells and 200 μl of the supporting medium was added (49% DMEM (Sigma, USA), 49% RPMI 1640 (Sigma, USA), 2% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, USA) and 1 μl/ml TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma, USA)). After 48 h of incubation (37 °C, 5% CO2), the presence of CPE was checked using an inverted microscope and cells were stained with crystal violet (neoFroxx, Germany). The value of the optical density was measured at the wavelength of 538 nm on a Multiskan FC reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Based on the obtained results, the Prophylactic activity indicator was calculated (1).Determination of infectious titer de novoTo determine the infectious titer we used supernatant with the virus after 48 h of incubation from the antiviral and the prophylactic activity assays. A tenfold titration of the supernatant was performed using RPMI medium (Sigma, USA). Next, 50 μl of the suspension was added to the monolayer of cells in a 96-well plate (pre-washed with 150 μl of PBS, pH = 7.4). The plate was incubated for 90 min in a thermostat at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After that, the supernatant was removed and 200 μl of the supporting medium (49% DMEM (Sigma, USA), 49% RPMI 1640 (Sigma, USA), 2% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, USA) and 1 μl/ml TPCK-treated trypsin (Sigma, USA)) was added. After the incubation for 48 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2, CPE was checked using an inverted microscope and cells were stained with crystal violet (neoFroxx, Germany). The value of the optical density was measured at the wavelength of 538 nm on a Multiskan FC reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Based on the obtained data, TCID50 (Median Tissue Culture Infectious Dose) values were calculated according to the Reed-Muench method17.Hemagglutination reactionThe hemagglutination reaction was carried out using a 2% suspension of guinea pig erythrocytes in PBS (pH = 7.4) according to the standard method18.Preparation of erythrocyte suspension: the animal's blood (2–5 ml) was taken postmortem into a test tube with anticoagulant—3.2% tri-sodium citrate dihydrate (Sigma, USA) diluted in sterile water (9 parts of blood + 1 part of anticoagulant). Carbon dioxide was used for euthanasia of the animals, which complies with the American Veterinary Medical Association. PBS (pH = 7.4) was added to the blood-anticoagulant mixture to a general volume of 10–12 ml. The test tube was centrifuged for 10 min at 1400 g and the supernatant was discarded. Centrifugation was repeated 2–3 times until the supernatant was clear. The resulting sediment of erythrocytes was diluted to the 2% suspension in PBS (pH = 7.4). Before use it was checked for autoagglutination: 25 μl PBS + 25 μl suspension in a plate with U-shaped wells left at a room temperature for 60 min.All experimental protocols were approved by the Bioethics Commision of the Zabolotny Institute of Microbiology and Virology of the National academy of Sciences of Ukraine. The conducted experiments do not contradict the current legislation of Ukraine (Article 26 of the Law of Ukraine 5456-VI of 16.10.2012 “On protection of animals from cruel treatment”) and “General ethical principles of animal experiments”, adopted by the First National Congress on Bioethics (Kyiv, 2001) and corresponded to international bioethical standards. All methods are reported in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines.Hemagglutination inhibition reactionThe experiment was conducted according to a modified classical HIR19. The influenza virus dilution corresponding to 8 HAU/25 μl (hemagglutination units) was used for performing HIR. Reaction was carried out using a 2% suspension of guinea pig erythrocytes in PBS (pH = 7.4) in a serological 96-well plate with U-shaped wells (SPL Life Sciences, Republic of Korea). 25 μl of PBS (pH = 7.4) was added to the wells. 25 μl of the test compound was added to the first well and 25 μl was transferred to the next one (twofold titration). 25 μl was removed from the last well. 25 μl of virus was added to each well. 25 μl of the erythrocyte suspension was added to all wells. 25 μl of PBS (pH = 7.4) + 25 μl of the suspension were added to the control wells of the quality of erythrocytes. To control the effect of the studied compounds on erythrocytes, 25 μl of virus-free suspension was added to the corresponding dilutions of the substances. It was mixed on a shaker for 1 min. The result was taken into account after 60 min of incubation at a room temperature.Preparation of input data for the in silico studiesThe selected file of the 3D structure of H1N1 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) (PDB ID: 7NK1), due to the lack of coordinate data for some amino acids, was completed based on the template using the SWISS-MODEL online resource20. For the further studies data of all molecules except the structure of the RdRp heterotrimer were deleted. The structure of the ligand – C60 fullerenol was generated using the Avogadro molecular editor21.Molecular dockingThe molecular docking of fullerenol C60(OH)60 with H1N1 RdRp was performed using the Vina Wizard tool of the PyRx software package22. For this study, the grid box included the entire heterotrimeric protein simultaneously. The value of exhaustiveness due to the predicted large protein–ligand interaction site was 40. For further simulation experiments, the position of fullerenol with the best evaluation score was selected.Simulation of molecular dynamicsThe actual construction of the system was carried out by the CHARMM-GUI toolkit23 using the CHARMM36m force field24 and involved the creation of a rectangular box with periodic boundary conditions, which contained the RdRp/fullerenol complex, water as a solvent (TIP3P model), K+ and Cl− ions at the physiological concentration 0.15 M. After construction, the system underwent the steepest descent minimization to a system energy value of less than 1000 kJ/molm (5000 steps). Next, the equilibration was carried out under conditions of stable volume and temperature of the system (classical NVT, Nose–Hoover thermostat, T-coupling constant of 1 ps, Van-der-Waals with Lennard–Jones potential and a 1.2 nm cut-off, electrostatic with a 1.2 nm cut-off, LINCS algorithm for covalent bonds, 303.15 K, the time step – 2 fs and the constraints for the protein) for 125 ps. The main simulation differed from the equilibration stage only by the additional condition of Parrinello-Raman barostat at 1 atm and the absence of restrictions on the protein position. The system temperature was 303.15 K. The equilibration and molecular simulations (100 ns) were performed in GROMACS 2020.625 using GPU as an accelerator.Calculation of the binding free energyThe gmx_MMPBSA 1.5.2 package was used to calculate the free energy using the MM/GBSA (Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born Surface Area) method26. The source of input data was the trajectory (the last 80% of frames – 800 in total) generated by GROMACS in the process of the molecular dynamics simulation of target associates. The polar contribution of solvation was estimated on the basis of the GB-OBC2 model27, and the non-polar contribution was estimated on the basis of SASA (solvent-accessible surface area). The contribution of the entropy component was calculated by the IE (interaction entropy) method28.Analysis of the results obtained in silicoThe results were analyzed using standard software provided by GROMACS (trjconv, rms, rmsf, hbond) and gmx_MMPBSA (gmx_MMPBSA_ana). Visualization was performed using XMGRACE29 and Pymol 1.830.Statistical processing of data obtained in vitroEach experiment was carried out in three independent repetitions of 3 wells for 1 concentration of the compound. Statistical data processing was performed in the Origin 2018 program. According to standard approaches standard deviation was calculated and confidence interval was determined (p ≤ 0.05 for all arrays).Data availabilityAll data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article. AbbreviationsCC50: 50% cytotoxic concentration TCID50: Median tissue culture infectious dose IAV: Influenza A virus HIR: Hemagglutination inhibition reaction RdRp: RNA-dependent RNA polymerase RMSD: Root mean square deviation RMSF: Root-mean-square fluctuation ReferencesNickol, M. E. & Kindrachuk, J. A year of terror and a century of reflection: Perspectives on the great influenza pandemic of 1918–1919. BMC Infect. Dis. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-3750-8 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shao, W., Li, X., Gorayaz, M. U., Wang, S. & Chen, J. L. Evolution of influenza a virus by mutation and re-assortment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18081650 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lampejo, T. Influenza and antiviral resistance: An overview. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-020-03840-9 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McKimm-Breschkin, J. L. Influenza neuraminidase inhibitors: Antiviral action and mechanisms of resistance. Influ. Other Respir. Viruses https://doi.org/10.1111/irv.12047 (2013).Article Google Scholar FDA Approval Package for 210854Orig1s001.s https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docsda/2019/210854Orig1s001.pdf Accessed 16 Oct 2019.Martinez, Z. S. et al. Fullerene derivatives strongly inhibit HIV-1 replication by affecting virus maturation without impairing protease activity. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00341-16 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kataoka, H., Ohe, T., Takahashi, K., Nakamura, S. & Mashino, T. Novel fullerene derivatives as dual inhibitors of hepatitis C virus NS5B polymerase and NS3/4A protease. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2016.08.086 (2016).Article PubMed Google Scholar Shoji, M. et al. Anti-influenza activity of c60 fullerene derivatives. PLoS ONE https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066337 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Klimova, R. et al. Aqueous fullerene C60 solution suppresses herpes simplex virus and cytomegalovirus infections. Fuller. Nanotub. Carbon Nanostruct. https://doi.org/10.1080/1536383X.2019.1706495 (2020).Article Google Scholar Skariyachan, S. et al. Carbon fullerene and nanotube are probable binders to multiple targets of SARS-CoV-2: Insights from computational modeling and molecular dynamic simulation studies. Infect Genet Evol. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2021.105155 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sharoyko, V. et al. Biologically active water-soluble fullerene adducts: Das glasperlenspiel (by H. Hesse)?. J. Mol. Liquids. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2020.114990 (2020).Article Google Scholar Jovic, D. et al. The puzzling potential of carbon nanomaterials: General properties, application, and toxicity. Nanomaterials (Basel) https://doi.org/10.3390ano10081508 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Semenov, K. et al. Fullerenols: Physicochemical properties and applications. Prog. Solid State Chem. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progsolidstchem.2016.04.002 (2016).Article Google Scholar Tazulakhova, E. B., Parshina, O. V., Guseva, T. S. & Ershov, F. I. Russian experience in screening, analysis, and clinical application of novel interferon inducers. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. https://doi.org/10.1089/107999001750069926 (2001).Article PubMed Google Scholar Ferhadian, D. et al. Structural and functional motifs in influenza virus RNAs. Front. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.00559 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Diallo, B. N., Swart, T., Hoppe, H. C., Tastan Bishop, Ö. & Lobb, K. Potential repurposing of four FDA approved compounds with antiplasmodial activity identified through proteome scale computational drug discovery and in vitro assay. Sci. Rep. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-80722-2 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Reed, L. J. & Muench, H. A. A simple method of estimating fifty per cent endpoints. Am. J. Epidemiol. 27, 493–497 (1938).Article Google Scholar Killian, M. L. Hemagglutination assay for influenza virus. Methods Mol Biol. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0758-8_1 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Pedersen, J. C. Hemagglutination-inhibition assay for influenza virus subtype identification and the detection and quantitation of serum antibodies to influenza virus. Methods Mol. Biol. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0758-8_2 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar Waterhouse, A. et al. SWISS-MODEL: Homology modelling of protein structures and complexes. Nucleic Acids Res. https://doi.org/10.1093ar/gky427 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hanwell, M. D. et al. Avogadro: an advanced semantic chemical editor, visualization, and analysis platform. J. Cheminform. https://doi.org/10.1186/1758-2946-4-17 (2012).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Trott, O. & Olson, A. J. AutoDock vina: Improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J. Comput. Chem. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.21334 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lee, J. et al. CHARMM-GUI input generator for NAMD, GROMACS, AMBER, OPENMM, and CHARMM/OpenMM simulations using the CHARMM36 additive force field. J. Chem. Theory Comput. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00935 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Huang, J. et al. CHARMM36m: An improved force field for folded and intrinsically disordered proteins. Nat Methods. https://doi.org/10.1038meth.4067 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Abraham, M. J. et al. GROMACS: High performance molecular simulations through multi-level parallelism from laptops to supercomputers. SoftwareX https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2015.06.001 (2015).Article Google Scholar Valdés-Tresanco, M. S., Valdés-Tresanco, M. E., Valiente, P. A. & Moreno, E. gmx_MMPBSA: A new tool to perform end-state free energy calculations with GROMACS. J. Chem. Theory Comput. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00645 (2021).Article PubMed Google Scholar Onufriev, A., Bashford, D. & Case, D. A. Exploring protein native states and large-scale conformational changes with a modified generalized born model. Proteins https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.20033 (2004).Article PubMed Google Scholar Duan, L., Liu, X. & Zhang, J. Z. Interaction entropy: A new paradigm for highly efficient and reliable computation of protein-ligand binding free energy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b02682 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Soman, S. S., Sivakumar, K. C. & Sreekumar, E. Molecular dynamics simulation studies and in vitro site directed mutagenesis of avian beta-defensin Apl_AvBD2. BMC Bioinform. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-S1-S7 (2010).Article Google Scholar DeLano, W.L. (2002) The PyMOL molecular graphics system on world wide web. http://www.pymol.orgDownload referencesFundingThis research received no external funding.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsZabolotny Institute of Microbiology and Virology of NASU, 154 Acad. Zabolotny St., Kyiv, 03143, UkrainePolina Zaremba, Andrii Zaremba, Krystyna Naumenko & Svitlana ZahorodniaPrivate Research Laboratory “Yelipashev”, 16 O. Davydova St., Kyiv, 02154, UkraineMykhailo YelipashevAuthorsPolina ZarembaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrii ZarembaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKrystyna NaumenkoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMykhailo YelipashevView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSvitlana ZahorodniaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsP.Z. performed the in vitro research, interpreted results, prepared and edited the original draft. A.Z. performed and interpreted the in silico studies. K.N. performed the in vitro research. S.Z. supervised the work, reviewed the final manuscript. M.Y. provided the studied drug, curated data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Polina Zaremba.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZaremba, P., Zaremba, A., Naumenko, K. et al. In vitro and in silico studies of the antiviral activity of polyhydrated fullerenes against influenza A (H1N1) virus. Sci Rep 13, 10879 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38128-3Download citationReceived: 02 March 2023Accepted: 03 July 2023Published: 05 July 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-38128-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by A Novel L-Cys@Cu MOF Embedding onto Cotton Fiber Surfaces to Exert Excellent Antiviral and Antibacterial Effects Yuanxiang XiaoJingjing JiangXiangdong Liu Advanced Fiber Materials (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingAvian influenza found in West Sussex - precautions and guidance Issued - West Sussex County Council Skip to content Search Menu Information and services Home About the County Council Births, ceremonies and deaths Business and consumers Education, children and families Fire, emergencies and crime Jobs Land, waste and housing Leisure, recreation and community Libraries Planning Roads and travel Social care and health Contact us Find out how to get in touch online or by phone. Get in touch Home News Avian influenza found in West Sussex - precautions and guidance Issued Avian influenza found in West Sussex - precautions and guidance Issued Poultry keepers in the Ferring area, near Angmering in Arun, are being urged to contact Trading Standards after a strain of avian influenza (H5N1) was found in a group of captive birds. Housing and movement restrictions for birds have been put in place by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) after the discovery near Ferring last week. Despite the lifting of previous poultry housing measures in West Sussex, an ‘Avian Influenza Captive Bird Monitoring Controlled Zone’ of 3 km radius has been declared around the infected premises to prevent further spread of the disease. Poultry, geese, or duck keepers within the affected zone are asked to inform Trading Standards by calling 01243 642 104 or completing an online form here. This information will assist the Animal and Plant Health Agency to arrange a free health check for the birds. Control Zone DEFRA DEFRA has advised that all captive birds within the zone must be housed until further notice. This means poultry should either be kept in solid accommodation or in an enclosure with a waterproof roof such as a tarpaulin. More details regarding the same can be accessed via the Protection Zone and Surveillance Zone information. For members of the public within the prevention zone, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) gave an assurance that avian flu primarily affects birds, posing minimal risk to human health. Nevertheless, as a safety measure, residents are urged not to handle any dead or visibly sick birds. Any findings of dead wild birds, including swans, ducks, geese, gulls, or birds of prey, should be immediately reported to the DEFRA helpline at 03459 335 577. Dog walkers are encouraged to keep their dogs on leads when encountering visibly sick or dead birds to ensure the safety of the animals and their owners. In addition to the above, West Sussex County Council Trading Standards will be visiting premises likely to be keeping poultry, geese and ducks in the controlled zone to ensure they are housed and to take details of the birds held and their health. Share this Share on Facebook (external link) Share on Twitter (external link) Share by email (external link) Print this page Do you have any feedback about this page? Help us improve this website Let us know if this page was helpful so we can make improvements. Add a star rating and leave your feedback below to show how useful you found this page. Please ignore this field Rate this page: 5 stars 4 stars 3 stars 2 stars 1 star Clear star rating... Feedback Email address West Sussex County Council will only use this email address to respond to any issues raised. Send your feedback Share this Share on Facebook (external link) Share on Twitter (external link) Share by email (external link) Print this page Related articles Firefighters walk the length of county in less than a day for charity Fire service honours staff, partners and the public at awards ceremony Meals on wheels is more than just a meal in West Sussex Information and services Home About the County Council Births, ceremonies and deaths Business and consumers Education, children and families Fire, emergencies and crime Jobs Land, waste and housing Leisure, recreation and community Libraries Planning Roads and travel Social care and health Contact us Find out how to get in touch online or by phone. Get in touch Facebook page for West Sussex County Council Twitter page for West Sussex County Council Youtube page for West Sussex County Council Sign up to receive email alerts from West Sussex County Council. Sign up Accessibility statement News Usability Email alerts and eNewsletters A to Z Contact us Cookies Privacy Policy Help Terms and disclaimer Licensing: Creative CommonsDon’t be fooled, illness going around Northeast Ohio is not COVID Skip to contentOperation Backpack2 Strong 4 BulliesContestsCBS19 AdvertisingSpot the SignsDealsNewsLiveFirst Alert WeatherVideoClosingsSportsSeen On TVTelemundo CLEPodcastsHomeWatch LiveSeen OnContestsDealsSubmit Photos & VideoSign Up For Our NewsletterNewsDownload News AppCrimeBuilding a Better ClevelandCuyahoga's Most WantedScam SquadThe Next 400NationalVideoDownload Streaming AppsLive NewscastsLatest News Videos19 News This Morning19 News Now19/43 Video VaultDrone 1919 Investigates19 Solutions Team19 TroubleshootersUnidentifiedThe MissingTo Catch a KillerPodcastsDark Side of the Land PodcastOff the Leash PodcastFirst Alert WeatherRadarClosingsDownload Weather AppFirst Alert Camera Network19 First Alert Safety GuideFirst Alert Science SchoolFirst Alert FocusWild WeatherPlanning CalendarTrafficGas PricesSportsCleveland BrownsCleveland CavaliersCleveland GuardiansOhio StateTailgate 19Friday Football FrenzyOff the LeashOperation OrangeHealthVaccineHealth UpdatesGo RedBreast CancerSpot the SignsFoodCleveland CooksTaste BudsCommunityOperation BackpackShare Your HolidaysCLE WeekendCW 43 FocusSubmit Photos & VideoCleveland NowSponsor SpotlightProgramming ScheduleCW43 ClevelandReport a Service OutageAbout UsContact UsMeet the TeamRequest an EmceeInternshipsCareersInvestigateTVWatching Your WalletGray DC BureauLatest NewscastsZeam - News StreamsCircle CountryPowerNationDigital MarketingDon’t be fooled, illness going around Northeast Ohio is not COVIDBy Dan DeRoosPublished: Jul. 6, 2023 at 9:47 AM EDT|Updated: Jul. 6, 2023 at 10:56 AM EDTEmail This LinkShare on FacebookShare on X (formerly Twitter)Share on PinterestShare on LinkedInCLEVELAND, Ohio (WOIO) -Doctors with University Hospitals are seeing cases of an illness that looks an awful lot like COVID.Human Parainfluenza (HPIV) is circulating and has many of the same symptoms as influenza which we see in the fall and winter, and COVID.HPIV can cause upper and lower respiratory illnesses in infants, young children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems, but anyone can get infected.According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) signs and symptoms are similar to the common cold and can include:feverrunny nosecoughsneezingsore throatOther symptoms of HPIV illness may include:ear painirritabilitydecreased appetiteAccording to Dr. Robert Salata with University Hospitals Roe Green Center for Travel Medicine and Global Health, there is no treatment for parainfluenza like there is for influenza. Salta says unfortunately the symptoms have to run their course and could last 7-10 days. Copyright 2023 WOIO. All rights reserved.Most Read Port Clinton woman indicted for ‘orchestrating and participating in’ September street takeovers2 thieves rob woman outside Cleveland pizza restaurantElection Day 2024: Presidential race, Ohio candidate results, interactive mapsCleveland Police looking for man who stole package off porch People take to the streets of Cleveland in protest of President-Elect TrumpAMBER ALERT canceled for 13-year-old girl abducted in Columbus Trump wins the White House in a political comeback rooted in appeals to frustrated voters Body of 33-year-old man found in Cuyahoga River identified as missing Avon Lake ManLatest News Younger women being diagnosed with breast cancer, including this Northeast Ohio mom Free medical, dental clinic happening this weekend in Cleveland Weathering the Storm: Jeff and Michele Tanchak share survival story for Breast Cancer Awareness MonthCleveland Dept. of Health aims to lower lead levels Cleveland Dept. of Health aims to lower lead levels19 Health Alert: New app uses A.I. face scan to predict allergy and asthma attacksWill your company soon cover popular weight loss drugs?Jenna Fischer shares breast cancer diagnosisHomeNewsFirst Alert WeatherSportsTrafficHealthFoodCommunityContact UsWOIO1717 E. 12th StreetCleveland, OH 44114(216) 771-1943Public Inspection FileFCC Applicationspublicfile@woio.com - (216) 367-7535Terms of ServicePrivacy PolicyEEO ReportAdvertisingDigital MarketingClosed Captioning/Audio Description ProblemsPersons With DisabilitiesAt Gray, our journalists report, write, edit and produce the news content that informs the communities we serve. Click here to learn more about our approach to artificial intelligence.A Gray Local Media Station © 2002-2024Raw meat linked to H5N1 bird flu outbreak among cats - BNO News Home U.S. News World Politics Legal Business Entertainment Menu Contact Us BNO News Wire Service ENS Alerts Editor’s Notes E-mail alerts Live feeds Connect with us BNO News Raw meat linked to H5N1 bird flu outbreak among cats Home U.S. NewsTrump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czarFormer U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accidentDonald Trump secures 312 electoral votes with victory in ArizonaTony Todd, star of ‘Candyman’ and ‘Final Destination’, dead at 69Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus WorldStrong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast CubaGunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10Canada reports first human case of H5 bird fluIsrael signs deal to buy 25 F-15 fighter jets from BoeingBomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says PoliticsTrump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czarFormer U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accidentDonald Trump secures 312 electoral votes with victory in ArizonaBomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state saysNearly 85 million Americans vote early in 2024 election LegalGunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in ColumbusTexas Amber Alert: Jordan Maceachran missing from Hunt CountyDrunk driver hits 2 police officers at Colorado crash site, killing 1Bomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says BusinessMcDonald’s says E. coli outbreak contained, Quarter Pounder coming backWashington Post stops endorsing presidential candidatesCloud, AI, and Data: The Triple Threat Transforming Small Business Operations7 Benefits of Attending Business ConferencesCasino Companies Continue to Fund Missouri Campaigns For and Against Sports Betting Entertainment Menu Contact Us BNO News Wire Service ENS Alerts Editor’s Notes E-mail alerts Live feeds Advertisment1 World Raw meat linked to H5N1 bird flu outbreak among cats Published on July 3, 2023 By BNO News Credit: Aleksandr Tarlõkov Advertisment17 Share Tweet Raw meat consumed by one of the infected cats in Poland has tested positive for H5N1 bird flu, according to researchers, adding to growing signs that a food product is behind the unusual outbreak. At least 16 cats across Poland have died and tested positive for H5N1 avian influenza, but health officials are still investigating dozens of suspected cases, raising questions about the cause of the outbreak as cats are typically not affected. “An assessment has shown that food is one of the likely routes of transmission of the pathogen,” virologist Krzysztof Pyrc said in a statement on late Monday night, together with fellow researchers Maciej Grzybek and Łukasz Rąbalski. Earlier on Monday, Poland’s Veterinary Institute confirmed that genomic sequencing had shown that the strains in nine of the confirmed cases were closely related, and also very similar to a strain found in a white stork in the Tarnów region in early June. Article continues below the player “This indicates that feline H5N1 avian influenza viruses analyzed so far originate from a single, unidentified source, related to the H5N1 viruses circulating in wild birds in recent weeks in Poland,” the institute said. In Monday night’s statement, the researchers said discussions with cat owners have led to raw meat as the possible source for the outbreak. “To test this theory initially, we asked the owners of sick cats to submit samples of the meat they ate. As a result, we received five meat samples for testing,” they said. “The analysis showed that 1 of the 5 samples contained the virus. Further analysis showed that the meat contains not only the genetic material of the virus but also the infectious virus, and we were able to isolate the virus in cell culture.” The researchers were not able to rule out the possibility that the meat sample was contaminated but they added that other signs are also pointing towards food as the likely route of transmission. Additionally, H5N1 was found in several samples from frozen duck meat in Germany in 2007. “In view of the above, it seems reasonable to appeal to the veterinary services and sanitary inspection to examine the meat available in Poland and consider the inclusion of meat for H5N1 testing,” they said. “This is crucial not only because of cats, but also because this virus is a threat to human life.” Experiments in the past have shown that H5N1 is capable of infecting cats through the intestines, which is not the case for humans. So far there is no evidence to suggest that people could be infected with H5N1 bird flu through the consumption of meat or eggs. Advertisment1 The outbreak in cats emerged on June 18 when a vet in western Poland reported the death of a cat which had suffered from neurological and respiratory symptoms. Since then, at least 86 suspected cases have been identified across the country. Out of 20 cats tested so far, 16 have tested positive. While a few cats in other countries have previously tested positive for H5N1, the outbreak in Poland is atypical given the number of cats affected. In December, a cat living near a duck farm in southern France was euthanized after becoming severely ill with the new strain of H5N1 bird flu, which emerged in late 2021 and continues to spread around the world. This was the first confirmed case in a cat. Since then, at least 6 more cats in the U.S. have also died of H5N1. All 7 cases were linked to direct contact with birds or poultry. The global spread of H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b – and the recent spread to a growing number of mammals – has raised concern about the possibility of a future variant which could lead to human-to-human transmission. So far, only a few human cases have been found after contact with infected birds. “The global H5N1 situation is worrying given the wide spread of the virus in birds around the world and the increasing reports of cases in mammals, including in humans,” Dr. Sylvie Briand, a WHO official, said on February 24. “WHO takes the risk from this virus seriously and urges heightened vigilance from all countries.” Related Topics:bird flucatsfeaturedH5N1 bird fluPoland Advertisment15 Advertisment5 Latest Politics20 hours ago Trump names former ICE director Tom Homan as border czar Politics23 hours ago Former U.S. Rep. Michael Grimm from New York paralyzed after horse riding accident World1 day ago Strong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast Cuba Legal2 days ago Gunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10 Advertisment4 Trending World2 days ago Canada reports first human case of H5 bird flu Legal1 week ago Texas Amber Alert: Connor Young missing from Heartland Legal3 days ago Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus Advertisment6 Most Viewed World2 days ago Canada reports first human case of H5 bird flu Legal1 week ago Texas Amber Alert: Connor Young missing from Heartland Legal3 days ago Ohio Amber Alert: Mackenzie Hall abducted in Columbus US News1 week ago Surfer attacked by shark near Hawaii’s Maui island, loses part of leg Entertainment1 week ago Music legend Quincy Jones, who worked with Michael Jackson, dead at 91 Legal6 days ago Bomb threats at 5 polling stations in Georgia came from Russia, state says Legal2 days ago Gunmen open fire at bar in central Mexico, killing 10 World1 day ago Strong 6.8-magnitude earthquake hits southeast Cuba Copyright © 2024 BNO News, B.V. All rights reserved. About Us | Privacy Policy | Terms | BNO en Español | Contact Us Advertisment18Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W26 2023 (Jun 26 - Jul 02) - Fiji | ReliefWeb Skip to main content Help Log in ReliefWeb Content Search What are you looking for? Search|t Updates Countries Disasters Organizations Topics Jobs Training Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 — a service provided by UN OCHA Fiji + 22 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W26 2023 (Jun 26 - Jul 02) Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 8 Jul 2023 Originally published 8 Jul 2023 Attachments Download Report (PDF | 501.5 KB) Download Report (PDF | 1.18 MB) Download Report (PDF | 487.98 KB | body with text and tables) Alerts: AFR: Fiji (6) COVID-19: CNMI (28), Palau (5) Solomon Islands (1) Influenza-like Illness (ILI): Niue Influenza-like Illness (ILI) PSSS, EPI -- WK 26, 2023 Influenza-like Illness (ILI) cases compared to WK 25, 2023 ILI cases are as tabulated as below for comparison. For an added perspective on the figures and trends percentage, country sentinel sites reporting for WKs 25 & 26 are also shown. Please refer Seasonal Influenzafor Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs) - ILI Surveillance Actual increase in the number of ILI cases has been seen in Niue, Pitcairn Islands, Cook Islands, Tonga, FSM, CNMI, and Fiji. The increased ILI cases seen in New Caledonia may be to the increased number of sites reporting for the week. The reduction in the number of ILI cases has been seen in Solomon Islands, Wallis & Futuna and Palau. The decreased ILI cases seen in Samoa and Vanuatu may be due to the decreased number of sites reporting for the week. No changes in number of ILI cases in RMI for the week. No reports were available from Kiribati, Tokelau and Tuvalu for the week. American Samoa and Nauru have not participated in the surveillance. Surveillance figures are not intended to capture all country cases but to describe trends over time and are invaluable when trends rise beyond country baselines which should then trigger alerts and timely actions to characterize the actual nature and magnitude of the disease. Avian Influenza Weekly Update: Influenza FSM has reported a total of eight (8) cases of influenza B out of 14 specimens since May 2023, which marks the beginning of the outbreak. (FSM Surveillance weekly report WK26) On week 26, Guam virological surveillance reported a 1.2% positivity rate for influenza for the year. A total of 4,227 samples were tested, resulting 52 confirmed influenza cases in the half of the year. Out of these cases, 35 were identified as influenza A, while 17 were Influenza B. Furthermore, out of the total influenza cases 14 individuals required admission to the hospital (SARI cases). Tragically, one death was recorded, and the deceased individual tested positive to influenza A. (Situation report 7 -/07//2023). (GMHA & GRMC Syndromic Surveillance MMWR weeks 1-26, 2023) French Polynesia Ministry of Health has reported that the incidence of ILI and influenza cases has now returned to low levels. For W26, 2 newly confirmed influenza cases were seen including 1 hospital admission. Eight (8) deaths have been attributed to influenza for the season. A combination of influenza A(H1N1), influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B/ Victoria lineage was seen with a predominance of influenza A. Source: Bulletin de surveillance sanitaire Polynésie française N°25 - 2023 -WK26/2023 Report details Primary country Fiji Other countries American SamoaCook IslandsFrench Polynesia (France)GuamKiribatiMarshall IslandsMicronesia (Federated States of)NauruNew Caledonia (France)New ZealandNiue (New Zealand)Northern Mariana Islands (The United States of America)PalauPapua New GuineaPitcairn IslandsSamoaSolomon IslandsTokelauTongaTuvaluVanuatuWallis and Futuna (France) Source World Health Organization Format Situation Report Theme Health Disaster type Epidemic Languages EnglishFrench Share Share this on Facebook Share this on X Post this on LinkedIn Related Content Fiji + 29 more Pacific Syndromic Surveillance System Weekly Bulletin / Système de Surveillance Syndromique dans le Pacifique - Bulletin Hebdomadaire: W44 2024 (Oct 28-Nov 8) [EN/FR] Format Situation Report Source WHO Posted 11 Nov 2024 Originally published 11 Nov 2024 Vanuatu Vanuatu: Watery Diarrhoea in Efate- Situation Update 02 - Report Date: 08 November 2024 I Covering Period from 01 January - 03 November 2024 Format News and Press Release Source Govt. Vanuatu Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 8 Nov 2024 PNG DTM Aiya Local Level Government, Southern Highlands Province, Papua New Guinea - Round 01 - Flooding and Landslip Rapid Assessment Report | 01-Nov-2024 Format Assessment Source IOM Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 1 Nov 2024 Kiribati + 3 more AUD 4.9 million to fortify Pacific region against health impacts of climate change Format News and Press Release Source SPREP Posted 8 Nov 2024 Originally published 8 Nov 2024 Blog Labs About Us Terms Contact Facebook X LinkedIn Instagram Telegram OCHA Services Related Platforms Humanitarian Action Central Emergency Response Fund Other OCHA Services Financial Tracking Service Humanitarian Data Exchange Humanitarian ID ReliefWeb Response Inter-Agency Standing Committee OCHA website ReliefWeb Virtual OSOCC More OCHA Services Opens in a new window Service provided by United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs UN OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions. © 2024 all rights reserved.Flu shots may be a solution as fever cases rage in Kerala E-PAPERNATIONWORLDSTATESOPINIONSCITIESBUSINESSSPORTGOOD NEWSMOVIESPHOTOSVIDEOSWEB SCRAWLNATIONWORLDSTATESOPINIONSCITIESBUSINESSSPORTGOOD NEWSMOVIESPHOTOSVIDEOSWEB SCRAWL KeralaFlu shots may be a solution as fever cases rage in KeralaIn June, the state recorded 2.93 lakh fever cases, including one death. On July 1 (Saturday), an additional 12,728 fever cases were reported. Image used for representationAnna JoseUpdated on: 03 Jul 2023, 1:42 am2 min readCopiedKOCHI: With the number of fever cases in Kerala reaching nearly three lakh patients in June and showing no signs of decline, the discussion regarding the administration of flu vaccines to the public has resurfaced.An expert committee led by Dr B Ekbal, entrusted with formulating a new immunisation policy last November, proposed the mandatory administration of flu vaccines to individuals aged 65 and above in Kerala. The committee submitted its recommendations to the state health department, however, no action has been taken even after more than seven months since the report was submitted, according to Ekbal, who was then the chairman of the Kerala Vaccine Policy Commission. Health Minister Veena George said that expert discussions are underway regarding the implementation of the policy. She mentioned that final-stage talks are ongoing within the government and with stakeholders. “The expert committee submitted the report last year. However, during the discussions, experts presented differing opinions. Nevertheless, we are now in the final stage of the discussion,” she explained. In June, the state recorded 2.93 lakh fever cases, including one death. On July 1 (Saturday), an additional 12,728 fever cases were reported. The delay in implementing the new vaccine policy is attributed to the changes in the flu virus, which raises concerns about the effectiveness of the current vaccine, according to Minister Veena. She highlighted the rapid shift and drift in flu viruses, causing delays in vaccine development and ongoing studies. Nonetheless, the vaccine can still be beneficial to some extent and can help reduce the number of deaths,she added. The high cost of the vaccine, approximately `1,500 to 1,800 per shot, may be another reason for the delay. However, experts suggest that the cost will decrease when the vaccine is administered on a mass scale. When asked about the relevance of the flu vaccine,Ekbal emphasised that unlike dengue or Covid-19, there is already an effective vaccine and antiviral treatment available for the flu. Dr A Rajalakshmi, a senior consultant in infectious diseases at KIMS Health Hospital Trivandrum, emphasized the importance of preventing the spread of diseases like the flu in society and ensuring that no one dies from it.”The flu vaccine gives protection against severe influenza, which can occur seasonally. If there is a dearth of resources, flu shots should be given to at least the high-risk population, who are elderly, pregnant women and those with a medical illness like lung, heart, kidney and other diseases,” she said.Rajalakshmi further highlighted that vaccination helps prevent hospitalisation and deaths caused by influenza. “Paediatric populations are also eligible for flu vaccine and by vaccinating them outbreaks in school, as well as a family cluster at home, is prevented as they can transmit to others including elderly in the family,” she said.Ekbal said it would be beneficial if everyone could receive the vaccine. While their recommendation is to prioritise vaccine administration among those above 65-years-old in the state, he emphasised that flu shots are suitable for everyone.Follow The New Indian Express channel on WhatsApp Download the TNIE app to stay with us and follow the latestkeralafever casesShow CommentsRelated StoriesNo stories found. Copyright - newindianexpress.com 2024. All rights reserved. Powered by Quintype X The New Indian Express www.newindianexpress.com INSTALL APPAll secondary school pupils eligible for free flu vaccine - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide this message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Parenting, childcare and children's services Children's health and welfare Children's health Press release All secondary school pupils eligible for free flu vaccine All secondary school pupils eligible for free flu vaccine as government expands vaccination programme. From: Department of Health and Social Care, UK Health Security Agency, NHS England, The Rt Hon Nick Gibb and Maria Caulfield Published 4 July 2023 This was published under the 2022 to 2024 Sunak Conservative government Over 3 million secondary school pupils to be offered nasal spray vaccine from 1 September Expansion provides direct protection to pupils and indirect protection to wider community Getting flu vaccine helps protect you and your loved ones, while reducing pressure on the NHS All secondary school pupils in England will be offered a free flu vaccine from September for the 2023 to 2024 season, the government has confirmed. An initial list of groups eligible for this year’s vaccine was first announced in May, with a note that a decision on secondary school pupils would follow at a later date. Now, the government has confirmed it is expanding the programme to over 3 million pupils in secondary school years 7 to 11, who will be offered the vaccine as a nasal spray through their school’s vaccination programme from 1 September. The expansion gives direct protection to pupils receiving the vaccine and provides indirect protection to more vulnerable groups by reducing the spread of the virus. Health Minister, Maria Caulfield, said: Expanding the offer of flu vaccination to all secondary school pupils this winter will provide millions of young people with extra protection. Importantly, this will also reduce the risk of transmission to more vulnerable groups, including the elderly, reducing hospitalisations and freeing up bed capacity across the NHS. Last winter we saw the devastating impact this illness can have, so it is important all pupils take up the offer of the flu vaccine to protect themselves and their loved ones from falling unwell. The decision to expand the programme is in line with a long-standing recommendation from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), which highlights the benefits of directly protecting school aged children from flu, and the indirect benefits to the wider population. NHS school age immunisation services (SAIS) will be undertaking the vaccinations from September during the autumn term. All primary school children and infants aged 2 and 3 will also be offered the flu vaccine, as previously announced in May. Eligible groups are urged to take up the offer from September before the flu season begins, to give themselves the best possible protection in winter. NHS Director of Vaccinations and Screening, Steve Russell, said: Last winter we saw how quickly flu can spread within communities, so I’m pleased to see the flu vaccination offer being extended to secondary school children in the autumn term. The vaccine offers vital protection against flu which can cause nasty symptoms, and I would urge all young people and parents to make sure they join millions of others who get vaccinated each year to take up the offer when they can - it’s quick, easy and offered in schools, so there’s really no reason to delay when you receive the offer. Dr Mary Ramsay, Head of Immunisation, UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), said: Getting the flu vaccine offers the best protection against the virus. It is important everyone eligible takes up the offer, including secondary school pupils as they can fall very sick. Last year we saw some teenagers hospitalised with flu. Expanding the vaccination to secondary school pupils will help to reduce flu from being spread, protecting their friends and family and easing the burden on the NHS. Schools Minister, Nick Gibb, said: Following the disruption caused by the pandemic, it’s important that children are able to attend school as much as possible. We know that school attendance levels drop over the winter months due to illness, which is why today’s announcement will not only protect children’s health but also their education. Background information Most children are offered a nasal spray vaccine which is quick and easy to administer and offers the best protection for children. A small number of children cannot have the nasal spray because of medical conditions or treatments. They can be offered protection through an injected vaccine instead. Recent interim analysis of the 2022 to 2023 flu season from UKHSA indicated that excess deaths in England associated with flu infection were higher (14,500) than the average figure (13,500) for the 5 years before the pandemic. The addition to the 2023 to 2024 flu letter confirming the expansion to secondary schools is available at: National flu immunisation programme plan 2023 to 2024. As with other standard school immunisations, the flu vaccine will be delivered by SAIS providers, with teams of clinical staff including paediatric nurses and school nurses running clinics in schools on set days. In line with national guidance, consent letters are sent out to parents and guardians prior to the school clinics with information on the flu vaccination. Parents and young people are asked to read the patient information in advance of arriving for their appointment. Staff will be working hard to offer the flu vaccine to all children in this age group in schools as quickly as possible. For those not attending school, such as those home schooled, parents and young people can book in for their flu vaccine with their GP or at a community clinic. Full list of those eligible for a free flu vaccine in the 2023 to 2024 season: those aged 65 years and over those aged 6 months to under 65 years in clinical risk groups (as defined by the Green Book, chapter 19 (influenza)) pregnant women all children aged 2 or 3 years on 31 August 2023 primary school aged children (from reception to year 6) all secondary school pupils in years 7 to 11 those in long-stay residential care homes carers in receipt of carer’s allowance, or those who are the main carer of an elderly or disabled person close contacts of immunocompromised individuals frontline workers in a social care setting without an employer led occupational health scheme including those working for a registered residential care or nursing home, registered domiciliary care providers, voluntary managed hospice providers and those that are employed by those who receive direct payments (personal budgets) or personal health budgets, such as personal assistants Share this page The following links open in a new tab Share on Facebook (opens in new tab) Share on Twitter (opens in new tab) Updates to this page Published 4 July 2023 Explore the topic Children's health Immunisation Infectious diseases Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don’t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab). Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright