What doctors wish patients knew about the flu | American Medical Association Skip to main content Explore AMA Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Delivering Care Delivering Care Coronavirus AMA Guides® Health Equity Public Health Physician-Patient Relationship Overdose Epidemic Hypertension Diabetes Population Care Precision Medicine Ethics Health equity in organized medicine survey reports The Health Equity in Organized Medicine (HEIOM) survey collects data on efforts by stateerritorial and specialty medical associations to advance health equity. Hurricane recovery in Florida, the IV fluid shortage and health care emergency preparedness The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about health care emergency preparedness. Practice Management Practice Management AMA STEPS Forward® AMA Store Practice Transformation CPT® Prior Authorization Reducing Administrative Burden Scope of Practice Sustainability Physician Health Claims Processing Private Practices Payment & Delivery Models Medicare & Medicaid Digital HIPAA Career Development Pearl of the Week: Reduce the documentation burden Find resources on outpatient documentation and coding. CPT errata & technical corrections Download PDFs to see the latest corrections to the published AMA CPT code books. Education Education AMA PRA Credit System Improve GME GME Funding Medical School Diversity ChangeMedEd Initiative International Medical Education Challenges with Matching for international medical graduates and how IMGs help residency programs The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about the Match rate for IMGs and more. Challenges with Matching for international medical graduates and how IMGs help residency programs [Podcast] The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about the Match rate for IMGs and more. Medical Students Medical Students Preparing for Medical School USMLE® Step 1 & 2 Medical School Life Medical Student Health Medical Student Finance Clinical Rotations Publishing Research Medical Student Advocacy Specialty Profiles Preparing for Residency AMA members can now save up to $80 off UWorld QBanks USMLE Steps 1–3, COMLEX Levels 1–2, ABIM and ABFM board exam prep are part of the special offer that ends Nov. 30. Learn more. What it's like in allergy and immunology: Shadowing Dr. Fraser AMA member Burcin Fraser, MD, of Privia Health, says that—depending on the setting— the work-life balance in allergy and immunology can be a big draw. Medical Residents Medical Residents Residency Life Research During Residency Medical Fellowships Medical Resident Wellness Medical Resident Advocacy Medical Residency Personal Finance USMLE® Step 3 Transition from Resident to Attending Holidays at the hospital during GME—6 tips to make the most of it Resident physicians often spend end-of-year holidays away from home, but interactions with peers and patients offer opportunities to find merriment. It matters how your practice is paid. A primer for young doctors. You need a job, and there are many different payment models prevalent. Learn which can work best for you. Health Care Advocacy Health Care Advocacy Advocating for Public Health Access to Care Administrative Burdens Payment Reform Advocacy Update Federal Advocacy State Advocacy Judicial Advocacy AMA advocacy efforts The AMA advocates at the federal and state levels on key health care issues impacting patients and physicians. Download the PDF updates of the AMA's impact. AMA advocacy events Collaborating and networking to advocate for patients and the medical profession. Member Benefits Member Benefits Personal Member Benefits & Discounts Practice Benefits & Discounts Member Eligibility & Dues Events CME Opportunities ChangeMedEd® 2025 ChangeMedEd® is a national conference that brings together leaders and innovators to accelerate change in medical education across the continuum. Learn more. Learning Collaborative: Augmented Intelligence (AI) Governance Build a framework for the implementation of AI in practice during this seven-month shared learning collaborative launching April 2025. Organization Board of Trustees House of Delegates House of Delegates HOD Organization AMA Policies Annual Meeting Interim Meeting AMA Elections Business of the AMA House of Delegates Interim Meeting Download PDFs and access information submitted for consideration at the AMA House of Delegates Interim Meeting. Highlights from the 2024 AMA Interim Meeting Track the news and key moments from the AMA House of Delegates’ meeting, which runs Nov. 8–12. Councils Councils Council on Constitution & Bylaws Council on Ethical & Judicial Affairs Council on Legislation Council on Long Range Planning & Development Council on Medical Education Council on Medical Service Council on Science & Public Health Medical education leadership opportunities Apply for a leadership position by submitting the required documentation by the deadline. General medical education: Council on Medical Education reports & issue briefs Download PDFs of reports on this topic from the Council on Medical Education presented during the AMA Interim and Annual Meetings. Member Groups (Sections) Member Groups (Sections) Section Meetings Academic Physicians LGBTQ+ Section Integrated Physician Practices International Medical Graduates Medical Students Minority Affairs Organized Medical Staff Private Practice Physicians Residents & Fellows Senior Physicians Women Physicians Young Physicians 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting highlights Read highlights from the 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting. 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting agenda & resources Find the agenda PDF, documents and more for the 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting on Nov. 8 at the Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin Resort, Orlando, Florida. About About AMA Center for Health Equity Board of Trustees Leadership Foundation Office of International Relations CPT® Editorial Panel RVS Update Committee (RUC) United States Adopted Names Publications & Newsletters Research AMA History Awards AMA Career Opportunities Physician Professional Data™ CPT® Editorial Panel Meeting Process Calendar Find a calendar listing the upcoming meetings of the CPT Editorial Panel. RVS Update Committee (RUC) Understand the role the AMA/Specialty Society RUC plays in providing physicians a voice in shaping Medicare relative values. Explore Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Join Renew Join / Renew Popular SearchesMedicare reformFree CME for membersBurnout by specialtyDEA training requirementJoy in Medicine program Member Benefits Sign In Sign In To Enjoy Your AMA Benefits Sign In Become a Member Create Free Account My Subscriptions My Topics My Bookmarks Public Health What doctors wish patients knew about the flu Feb 3, 2023 . 9 MIN READ By Sara Berg, MS , News Editor Subscribe What Doctors Wish Patients Knew™ Member Benefits Print Page Share Share via Email Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Doximity Copy Add Bookmark AMA News Wire What doctors wish patients knew about the flu Feb 3, 2023 With the COVID-19 pandemic and all its precautions—masking, physical distancing and staying home—influenza activity was drastically lower in 2020 and 2021 than in previous years. Advancing public health AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students. Learn More Now the flu is back, with hospitalizations at their highest levels and case counts continuing to rise across the country. Yet with a “tripledemic” of COVID-19, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and influenza, it may be hard to know which virus you have. An infectious diseases physician sets out to clear things up about influenza to navigate the flu season.This season, there have been at least 22 million flu illnesses and 8.6–18 million influenza medical visits. There have also been about 230,000 hospitalizations due to the flu and 14,000 influenza deaths, according to estimates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.The AMA’s What Doctors Wish Patients Knew™ series gives physicians a platform to share what they want patients to understand about today’s health care headlines.In this installment, Preeti Malani, MD, an infectious diseases physician and professor of medicine in the infectious diseases division at the University of Michigan Medical School, took time to discuss what patients need to know about influenza. Dr. Malani is also deputy editor of JAMA®. There are two types of flu There are two types of flu The “flu is a respiratory illness caused by the influenza virus. And there are two types of flu—there's type influenza A and influenza B,” Dr. Malani said. “Those are important because the way the vaccine works is it includes particular types of the flu.”Influenza A and B viruses cause seasonal epidemics—known as flu season—that happen almost every winter in the U.S., she noted. And the influenza A virus is the only type known to cause flu pandemics, such as H1N1 in 2009.“Influenza A viruses are divided into subtypes based on two proteins on the surface of the virus, which are hemagglutinin and neuraminidase,” Dr. Malani explained, noting that this helps in “understanding where the flu came from and what its genetics look like. It also determines treatment options.”For example, “influenza B is less common, but we may want to use a particular drug if someone has flu B,” she said, noting that influenza “A is more prominent than B.” What doctors wish patients knew Subscribe for the answers to the latest questions patients are bringing to the exam room. Subscribe Now This is the most severe flu in years This is the most severe flu in years “Normally, we don’t wear masks. This has been something in the last couple years—at least in the United States—so there’s a lot of speculation on why there’s an early rise in flu cases,” Dr. Malani said. “And to be clear, this is the most severe flu season that’s been seen in years and probably the most hospitalizations ever recorded, particularly for November and December.”“If you look back at 2020, there was no flu because people were in their homes, they were wearing masks if they left their homes, and the COVID-19 vaccines were just becoming available in late December 2020 and those were for the highest risk people,” she said. “Then last year there was a lot of concern that we were going to see this twindemic and although there were some cases of flu, we didn’t see a large wave.”“So, it’s been three years since there’ve been large numbers of flu cases. And if you go back further to 2009, 2010 with H1N1, that was a very bad couple years. And this year appears to be like that,” Dr. Malani said. “There’s a lot of theory on why and it may just be that we haven’t had flu in a couple years, much like the RSV that we have seen because kids who are 3 years old haven’t had any illness, so they have very little immunity to some of these circulating viruses.” Related Coverage Expert advice on seniors, pregnant women and flu shots Flu incubation period is short Flu incubation period is short “Symptoms are usually going to occur within a couple days of exposure, although it could be a little bit longer,” Dr. Malani said. “But this isn’t something that a week later you’re developing symptoms.”“Something about COVID that surprised me initially was how long that incubation period could be and that’s in part what has helped COVID spread,” she said. “Again, the most current Omicron variants, the incubation period tends to be less long, often within three days, but with flu the average is probably a couple days, maybe up to four.” Be aware of flu symptoms Be aware of flu symptoms “With the flu, it could be fevers, it could be fatigue initially and just feeling like you just don’t feel well. And it could come on pretty suddenly where you’re feeling OK and then you’re just exhausted,” Dr. Malani said, noting that “your body aches and then you can develop the respiratory symptoms later.”Additionally, “you may have a little cough, congestion and, in someone who’s older or more vulnerable, it could be much more severe. It could become pneumonia,” she said. “And little kids get flu a lot too and they may get fevers and runny noses. That could be how flu presents in someone who’s younger.” Length of sickness varies Length of sickness varies While “it varies from person to person, little kids might get better quicker,” Dr. Malani said. “But most people within a week are going to feel close to baseline.”However, “four or five days is probably the average, but people might be coughing for weeks,” she said, noting that is because of “inflammation and they may just not feel well for quite a while.” Get tested to confirm it is the flu Get tested to confirm it is the flu “COVID-19 testing at home remains very important and very helpful,” said Dr. Malani. “But just because your test is negative doesn’t mean you can go about your business as usual, especially if you have symptoms.”After ruling out COVID-19, it could still be the flu. But “if you’re not feeling that poorly and you have mild symptoms, it’s fine to stay home. You generally don’t need to go and seek care if you’re otherwise healthy,” she said. “For someone who has more health conditions, is older or pregnant, then getting tested for the flu in your doctor’s office is helpful to determine a proper treatment plan.” There are treatments for the flu There are treatments for the flu “Right now, there’s just a lot of flu everywhere in the U.S. And one of the things that’s important with flu is that if you do have influenza—not another respiratory virus—there are treatments, but they need to be given early to be most effective,” Dr. Malani said, noting “there are a few different treatment options for the flu.”“There’s antiviral treatment. So, the main one is oseltamivir, or Tamiflu,” she said. “But there’s a shortage of this drug, so people are being asked to be more thoughtful about who gets prescribed this.”Then “there is another drug that’s called Baloxavir and this is a one-time dose. It’s also an oral medication and is usually given over five days,” Dr. Malani said. Pregnancy is a big risk for the flu Pregnancy is a big risk for the flu When it comes to influenza treatment “we think of older adults, little babies, kids under 2 and individuals with chronic illness such as heart disease, lung disease, diabetes, cancer, and anyone with a weakened immune system,” said Dr. Malani. “But pregnancy is also a big one with influenza and this is why during prenatal care, flu shots are really a priority.”“With flu and pregnancy, those are younger people who we see that end up hospitalized,” she said, emphasizing that “not everyone, but the young people we see who do very poorly with flu are often pregnant.” Stay home if you have the flu Stay home if you have the flu “If someone is ill and they have cold symptoms and a cough or fever, it’s really important that they not go out and expose other people,” said Dr. Malani. “And hopefully that’s something that we have socialized. Something that many of us—myself included—have done in the past is we’ve gone to places sick.“We’ve gone to work sick. We’ve sent our kids to school sick. And the pandemic has really helped socialize the idea that you shouldn’t be going to a social event if you’re not feeling well,” she added. “The system should allow flexibility for work or school or wherever you’re going.” Related Coverage 8 things doctors wish patients knew about flu vaccines Wear a mask Wear a mask “Masks are very effective at preventing transmission of respiratory viruses,” Dr. Malani said, and that includes the flu. If someone in your household is sick—like if you have young kids at home—you can’t really isolate because you have to take care of them.“If you’re able to wear a mask at home, if might help you not get sick. Around the world masks have been used successfully during respiratory virus season,” she said. “And I understand that in the United States a lot of people have moved on and they don’t want to wear masks anymore, but I would strongly encourage people—especially while traveling—to wear a mask in crowded spaces.” Avoid aspirin with the flu Avoid aspirin with the flu “If you do have the flu, it is important to stay hydrated. You can also take medications to decrease fevers and drink tea or broth,” Dr. Malani said. “But you do want to avoid Aspirin, especially in kids and teens.”“Acetaminophen or ibuprofen will help with fever. It will also help with muscle aches,” she said, emphasizing that it is important to rest as much as possible when you have the flu. It’s not too late to get the flu shot It’s not too late to get the flu shot When it comes to influenza, “the things that are going to be important are prevention,” said Dr. Malani. That means “getting a flu shot” and knowing that “it’s not too late to get a flu shot.”“The vaccine effectiveness—how well the vaccine is working in the real world—appears to be pretty good for this year,” she said. “And I’ve seen estimates around 50%, which for a flu vaccine is outstanding.”“While it doesn’t prevent all illness, vaccination prevents severe illness. So, much like COVID-19 vaccines, getting a flu shot will help prevent you from being hospitalized, certainly from death and other severe complications of flu,” Dr. Malani explained. Unfortunately, though, “the numbers are below an optimal uptake and there are a lot of younger people who haven’t been vaccinated. There are actually quite a few older people who haven’t been vaccinated either.”It may be too late for an influenza vaccine “when there’s not flu circulating anymore, which would probably be in the spring,” she said. “But right now, it’s still a good time to get the flu vaccine and you can get it at the same time as your COVID-19 bivalent booster.”“This year is on track to being one of the worst flu years in memory. It’s already headed that way, so the more we can do to get the word out to people to remind them to get flu shots, the better we’ll fare,” Dr. Malani emphasized. Table of Contents There are two types of flu This is the most severe flu in years Flu incubation period is short Be aware of flu symptoms Length of sickness varies Get tested to confirm it is the flu There are treatments for the flu Pregnancy is a big risk for the flu Stay home if you have the flu Wear a mask Avoid aspirin with the flu It’s not too late to get the flu shot Table of Contents There are two types of flu This is the most severe flu in years Flu incubation period is short Be aware of flu symptoms Length of sickness varies Get tested to confirm it is the flu There are treatments for the flu Pregnancy is a big risk for the flu Stay home if you have the flu Wear a mask Avoid aspirin with the flu It’s not too late to get the flu shot Upvote 1 Influenza (Seasonal Flu) Vaccines, Vaccinations & Immunizations Coronavirus (COVID-19) Women's Health Referencing JAMA Network™ Patient Resources What Doctors Wish Patients Knew™ Catalog of Topics FEATURED STORIES Nov 4, 2024 · 4 MIN READ Building consensus to fix prior auth at the state level Oct 31, 2024 · 5 MIN READ Time to crack down on ERISA plans’ use of prior authorization Oct 30, 2024 · 5 MIN READ 5 ways to optimize the patient portal and cut physician burdens Nov 4, 2024 · 6 MIN READ To attract new physicians, listen to the ones already on board Also of Interest:What doctors wish patients knew about the...Norovirus outbreak: Is there a stomach bug...What doctors wish patients knew about strep throat The AMA promotes the art and science of medicine and the betterment of public health. AMA Contact Us Download AMA Connect app for iPhone or Android AMA Careers Events Press Center AMA Alliance AMPAC AMA Foundation The best in medicine, delivered to your mailbox Please enter your email address. I verify that I’m in the U.S. and agree to receive communication from the AMA or third parties on behalf of AMA. Explore AMA Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Terms of Use Privacy Policy Code of Conduct Website Accessibility Copyright 1995 - 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.A TLR7-nanoparticle adjuvant promotes a broad immune response against heterologous strains of influenza and SARS-CoV-2 | Nature Materials Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature materials articles article A TLR7-nanoparticle adjuvant promotes a broad immune response against heterologous strains of influenza and SARS-CoV-2 Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 30 January 2023 A TLR7-nanoparticle adjuvant promotes a broad immune response against heterologous strains of influenza and SARS-CoV-2 Qian Yin1 na1, Wei Luo ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2826-17231 na1 nAff10, Vamsee Mallajosyula ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0658-36521, Yang Bo2, Jing Guo ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6616-25853, Jinghang Xie ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0894-57654, Meng Sun1, Rohit Verma1, Chunfeng Li1, Christian M. Constantz1, Lisa E. Wagar ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5980-35861 nAff11, Jing Li1, Elsa Sola1, Neha Gupta1, Chunlin Wang1, Oliver Kask1, Xin Chen1, Xue Yuan5, Nicholas C. Wu ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9078-66976, Jianghong Rao ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-5143-95294,7, Yueh-hsiu Chien1,3, Jianjun Cheng ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2561-92912, Bali Pulendran ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6517-43331,3,8 & …Mark M. Davis ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6868-657X1,3,9 Show authors Nature Materials volume 22, pages 380–390 (2023)Cite this article 21k Accesses 46 Citations 34 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects AdjuvantsDrug delivery AbstractThe ideal vaccine against viruses such as influenza and SARS-CoV-2 must provide a robust, durable and broad immune protection against multiple viral variants. However, antibody responses to current vaccines often lack robust cross-reactivity. Here we describe a polymeric Toll-like receptor 7 agonist nanoparticle (TLR7-NP) adjuvant, which enhances lymph node targeting, and leads to persistent activation of immune cells and broad immune responses. When mixed with alum-adsorbed antigens, this TLR7-NP adjuvant elicits cross-reactive antibodies for both dominant and subdominant epitopes and antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell responses in mice. This TLR7-NP-adjuvanted influenza subunit vaccine successfully protects mice against viral challenge of a different strain. This strategy also enhances the antibody response to a SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccine against multiple viral variants that have emerged. Moreover, this TLR7-NP augments antigen-specific responses in human tonsil organoids. Overall, we describe a nanoparticle adjuvant to improve immune responses to viral antigens, with promising implications for developing broadly protective vaccines. Similar content being viewed by others Multicomponent intranasal adjuvant for mucosal and durable systemic SARS-CoV-2 immunity in young and aged mice Article Open access 29 June 2023 Adjuvant lipidoid-substituted lipid nanoparticles augment the immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccines Article 26 June 2023 Adjuvanting a subunit COVID-19 vaccine to induce protective immunity Article 19 April 2021 MainVaccines represent one of the most efficient and cost-effective means to control dangerous pathogens and preserve public health1,2. Yet, many challenges to vaccine development persist. Current influenza vaccines induce antibodies against the immunodominant part of virus—the globular head of haemagglutinin (HA). However, influenza viruses constantly undergo antigenic drift, resulting in limited breadth and inadequate effectiveness of current seasonal influenza vaccines3. While not as variable as influenza, many variants of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) have been reported4,5. These variants in general carry mutations in the receptor-binding domain (RBD)-containing spike protein, which can substantially reduce vaccine effectiveness6. As such, there is a critical need to develop broadly protective vaccines that can induce cross-reactive antibody responses against multiple viral variants.Compared to the immunodominant yet hypervariable head domain of HA, subdominant epitopes in the HA stem are more conserved and have the potential to generate cross-reactive immune responses7,8. Tremendous efforts have been focused on antigen design to improve humoral responses against the HA stem region, such as multivalent HA-nanoparticles9,10,11,12, and ‘headless’ HA-stalk region-based immunogens13,14,15,16. Although effective, these approaches often involve sophisticated protein engineering processes and may not be rapidly and readily scalable to meet the global demand.Adjuvants can play a crucial role in modulating vaccine-induced immune responses17,18. However, apart from a study ten years ago by Golding and co-workers19 that reported that MF59 adjuvant could broaden a flu response, optimizing adjuvants to improve the diversity of a vaccine response has not been extensively studied. Aluminium hydroxide (alum), a primary adjuvant currently used in commercial vaccines20, failed to induce broad antibody responses17. Agonists of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have been explored as adjuvant candidates in mice and non-human primates18,21,22,23,24,25,26,27. Although a library of potent small molecular TLR7 agonists (for example, imidazoquinolines and its derivatives) are under continuous development, their use as vaccine adjuvants has not progressed beyond early clinical trials due to the rapid diffusion from the injection site and subsequent undesirable systemic immune activation28. 3M-052 (refs. 27,29,30,31), an imidazoquinoline adjuvant designed with a C18 lipid moiety to slow dissemination from the injection site, was shown to elicit high-magnitude and durable antibody responses in non-human primates27,29. Furthermore, an adjuvant system using alum-adsorbed TLR7 agonist (trade name: AS37)32,33 has been evaluated in clinical trials34. However, using these adjuvants to enhance antibody breadth against mutated influenza viral variants remains largely unexplored.Here we present an alternative TLR7 agonist nanoparticle (TLR7-NP) adjuvant system with tunable drug loading, narrow size distribution and controlled release kinetics. Compared to the small molecular TLR7 agonist in the mixture with alum (TLR7–alum), TLR7-NP improved in vivo retention, draining lymph node (dLN) accumulation and cellular uptake of TLR7 agonist by various antigen-presenting cells (APCs), leading to persistent activation of dendritic cells (DCs) and B cells in dLNs and significantly enhanced germinal centre (GC) and CD8 T-cell responses. We further demonstrate that TLR7-NP-adjuvanted influenza and SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccines induced high levels of cross-reactive antibody responses to multiple heterologous viral variants. Remarkably, the TLR7-NP-adjuvanted influenza vaccine induced early and markedly improved titres of subdominant HA-stem specific antibodies and generated effective cross-protection against heterologous influenza viral challenge. We also show that the TLR7-NP adjuvanted a SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccine with significantly enhanced plasmablast differentiation and antibody isotype switching in a human tonsil organoid system, demonstrating its translational potential.Design and characterization of the TLR7-NPThe TLR7-NP was made by co-nanoprecipitation of TLR7–polylactide (TLR7–PLA) polymer conjugates and poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PEG-PLGA) (Fig. 1a). TLR7–PLA polymer conjugates were synthesized by using gardiquimod, a potent agonist for TLR7 receptor expressed in both mouse and human, to initiate the ring-opening polymerization of lactide35,36,37. This method allowed for quantitative incorporation of gardiquimod into PLA polymers and resulted in TLR7–PLA conjugates with precisely controlled compositions and molecular weights (Extended Data Fig. 1a,b). At a monomer/initiator (LA/gardiquimod) ratio of 25, gardiquimod loading as high as 14.8 wt% was achieved with nearly 100% incorporation efficiency. The resultant TLR7–PLA polymer conjugates mixed with PEG-PLGA and self-assemble into TLR7-NP with 77 nm hydrodynamic diameter and narrow size distributions (polydispersity index = 0.105) characterized by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1: Synthesis, formulation and characterization of TLR7-NP.a, Schematic illustration of synthesizing TLR7–PLA polymer conjugate via TLR7 agonist (gardiquimod)-initiated ring-opening polymerization of lactide and preparing TLR7-NP through nanoprecipitation. b, Hydrodynamic sizes of TLR7-NP characterized by DLS analysis. D, hydrodynamic diameter; PDI, polydispersity index. c, The ultraviolet absorbance of TLR7–PLA polymer, gardiquimod and TLR7-NP after release measured by ultraviolet spectrometry at λ = 321 nm. d, Release kinetic profile of gardiquimod from TLR7-NP in foetal bovine serum (FBS)/phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (v/v = 1/1) buffer at pH 5 and pH 7. Data are mean ± s.e.m. with n = 3 independent samples for each time point.Source dataFull size imageIn the design of TLR7-NP, gardiquimod was conjugated to PLA polymer through hydrolysable ester bonds. Released gardiquimod from TLR7-NP (red) shared the identical ultraviolet–visible absorbance spectrum as the original gardiquimod (black), providing evidence of releasing unmodified TLR7 agonist without any residual chemical groups (Fig. 1c). To assess the release profile of gardiquimod from TLR7-NP under different physiological conditions, we conducted the release kinetic studies at pH 5 and 7. As shown in Fig. 1d, gardiquimod was released from TLR7-NP in a sustained manner without burst release effects at pH 7, potentially minimizing the undesired systemic diffusion during the circulation. The release rate of gardiquimod from TLR7-NP was accelerated at pH 5, probably due to faster hydrolysis with increased acidities, which is important for robust activation of intracellular TLR7 receptors once internalized into the endosome/lysosome of immune cells (Fig. 1d).Lymph node targeting and cellular internalizationTo determine how TLR7-NP influenced the in vivo trafficking of gardiquimod, we labelled gardiquimod in the TLR7–PLA polymer with Alexa Fluor (AF) 647 to prepare AF647-labelled TLR7-NP. For comparison, we mixed AF647-conjugated gardiquimod with alum to make AF647-labelled TLR7–alum (Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Unlike AS37 formulated by the adsorption of benzonaphthyridine-phosphonates onto alum via phosphonate ligand exchange, gardiquimod in the TLR7–alum is only loosely associated with alum, with an average of 98.4% presenting as free small molecules. For antigen, we used alum-adsorbed protein for all of the studies in the work presented here. AF647-labelled TLR7-NP or TLR7–alum combined with chicken ovalbumin (OVA) was injected subcutaneously into C57BL/6 mice at tail base and tracked by whole-body fluorescence imaging. TLR7–alum was rapidly cleared from the injection site only 1 day post-injection, whereas TLR7-NP persisted for at least 3 days (Fig. 2a). The fluorescence intensity of AF647 in the dLNs was significantly enhanced with TLR7-NP as early as 1 day post-injection and maintained for as long as 3 days post-immunization (Fig. 2b). Compared to TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP fluorescence persisted in dLNs with a 22.9-fold increase at day 1 and a ~10-fold increase at day 3 after immunization. These results indicate that TLR7-NP preferentially targeted and was retained in the dLNs much longer than TLR7–alum.Fig. 2: TLR7-NP improves the in vivo performance of gardiquimod and induces persistent activation of antigen-presenting cells in dLNs.C57BL/6 mice were immunized with TLR7–alum- or TLR7-NP-adjuvanted alum-adsorbed OVA (50 μg) at day 0. In a,b,c,f, gardiquimod was labelled by AF647 (excitation/emission = 651/672 nm) fluorophore, and an equivalent dose of AF647-gardiquimod (20 nmol) was used for TLR–alum and TLR7-NP. In d,e, an equivalent amount of gardiquimod (20 μg) was used for both TLR7–alum and TLR7-NP. a, Representative whole-body fluorescence imaging and average normalized total radiance from groups of mice (n = 3 mice per group) at the injection site over time. p.i., post-injection. b, Fluorescence imaging of excised dLNs and plotted integrated mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) at day 1 and 3 (n = 4 and 6 LNs per group). c, Uptake of AF647-gardiquimod by different APCs in dLNs at day 1 and 3 post-immunization (n = 2 and 2 mice for naive, n = 4 and 4 mice for TLR7–alum, n = 6 and 4 mice for TLR7-NP). Data in a–c are mean ± s.d. d, Number of different innate immune cells at 0 (n = 9 naive mice), 1 and 4 days post-immunization (n = 9 and 9 mice per group). e, The MFI of CD86 expression on cDC1 and cDC2 in dLNs for day 1 and 4 (n = 3 and 3 mice for naive, n = 5 and 5 mice for TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP). f, B-cell uptake and activation was measured by flow cytometry on dLNs on day 1 and 3 (n = 4 and 4 mice for TLR7–alum, n = 4 and 4 mice for TLR7-NP). Data in d–f are mean ± s.e.m. All the data are analysed by two-sided, unpaired t-test with Welch’s correction. P values are as shown. Data were combined from two independent experiments (b,c,d,f) or from one representative of two independent experiments (a,e).Source dataFull size imageCompared to TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP showed a 5.5- to 27.8-fold increase in the cellular uptake of gardiquimod in the vast majority of APCs in dLNs, including B cells, DCs, macrophages and Ly6Chi inflammatory monocytes, as early as 1 day post-injection and persisted for at least 3 days (Fig. 2c). The enhanced cellular uptake was associated with increased cell numbers and persistent activation of DCs and cells of monocytic lineage in the dLNs (Fig. 2d,e and Extended Data Fig. 3). Interestingly, TLR7-NP efficiently accumulated around the follicular dendritic cell (FDC) network in the B-cell follicles 2 days post-immunization (Extended Data Fig. 4a). In line with this, TLR7-NP promoted the uptake of gardiquimod by B cells and induced sustained B-cell activation, characterized by activation marker CD86 at days 1 and 3 post-injection (Fig. 2f). To further examine whether the antigen co-localizes with adjuvant after injection, we labelled the OVA antigen with AF488 and gardiquimod with AF647, respectively, in the TLR7–alum- or TLR7-NP-adjuvanted vaccines. Strikingly, TLR7-NP immunization significantly increased the percentage of B cells that co-internalized the OVA antigen and gardiquimod compared with the TLR7–alum-adjuvanted one (Extended Data Fig. 4b), demonstrating the advantages of TLR7-NP over TLR7–alum in promoting TLR7 activation of antigen-specific B cells.GC and extrafollicular B-cell responsesThe enhanced and sustained activation of innate immune cells and B cells by TLR7-NP encouraged us to assess the subsequent effects on humoral immune responses, which largely depend on GC reactions38. To test whether TLR7-NP can alter GC dynamics, we immunized mice with TLR7-NP- or TLR7–alum-adjuvanted NP-OVA and performed a time-course study from day 4 to day 22 post-immunization. As shown in Fig. 3a, compared with TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP-adjuvanted antigen immunization induced a strikingly high level of GC B-cell responses in dLNs. Consistent with GC B-cell kinetics, CXCR5+ PD1+ follicular CD4+ T cells were also highly expanded in TLR7-NP-immunized mice. These follicular CD4+ T cells contain T follicular helper cells (Tfh) and T follicular regulatory cells (Tfr). Tfh provide essential help to GC B cells while Tfr restrains GC reaction39. Interestingly, the percentage of Tfr in TLR7-NP-immunized mice is significantly lower than that in TLR7–alum-immunized mice (Fig. 3b). All these data strongly suggest that TLR7-NP could potently promote the GC response. Interestingly, TLR7-NP could also promote the extrafollicular B-cell response with markedly increased numbers of early plasmablasts (Fig. 3a). Mice immunized with TLR7-NP- or TLR7–alum-adjuvanted NP-OVA showed similar affinity maturation as probed by the ratio of high-affinity IgG (NP2-BSA binding) versus total IgG (NP14-BSA binding) from week 2 to week 5 post-immunization (Extended Data Fig. 5a). Strikingly, mice immunized with TLR7-NP, but not TLR7–alum, can generate high levels of antibodies against the subdominant OVA epitopes at day 14 post-immunization, suggesting the change of immunodominance (Fig. 3c).Fig. 3: TLR7-NP enhances the magnitude and quality of both humoral and CD8+ T-cell responses.Mice were immunized with alum-adsorbed NP-OVA (50 μg) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in either TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP on day 0. a, Representative flow cytometry plots on day 7 and the quantification of immune cells in dLNs from day 4, 7, 14, 22 (n = 8, 8, 8, 8 mice for TLR7–alum, n = 7, 6, 7, 6 mice for TLR7-NP). b, Representative flow cytometry plots and the analysis of Tfr within follicular CD4+ T cells (n = 7, 6 mice for TLR7–alum, n = 6, 7 mice for TLR7-NP). c, ELISA analysis of day 14 serum antibodies specific for NP and OVA (n = 6, 7 mice for TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP). Data are medians with each dot representing one mouse. P values were calculated by Mann–Whitney test. d, The quantification of tetramer+ effector memory (CD44hi CD62Llow) and tetramer+-activated (CD69hi) CD8+ T cells on day 4, 7, 14 (n = 3 mice for naïve (day 0), n = 4, 6, 5 mice for TLR7–alum, n = 4, 6, 6 mice for TLR7-NP). e, Representative flow cytometry plots and the quantification of Gzmb+ CD8+ T cells in dLNs on day 4, 7, 14 (n = 5, 7, 6 mice for TLR7–alum, n = 5, 6, 7 mice for TLR7-NP). f, Total number of Gzmb+ CD8+ T cells in the lungs on day 14 (n = 6, 7 mice for TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP). g, Total number of Gzmb+ lung tissue-resident CD8+ T cells on day 21 (n = 7, 8 mice for TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP). Except for the data in c, all other data are mean ± s.e.m. The data in a,d,e are analysed by two-sided, unpaired t-test; the other data are analysed by two-sided, unpaired t-test with Welch’s correction. Data in a,e and b,c,d,f,g were combined from three and two independent experiments, respectively.Source dataFull size imageAntigen-specific CD8+ T-cell responsesTLR7-NP has efficiently induced persistent mobilization and activation of conventional type 1 dendritic cells (cDC1), which are vital for cross-priming CD8+ T cells. Indeed, we found that TLR7-NP-adjuvanted vaccine significantly induced early activation of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells (CD69hi SIINFEKEL+) at day 4 post-immunization, and dramatically increased the numbers of CD44hi CD62Llow effector memory CD8+ T cells (Tem) at day 7 (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 5b). This change in Tem is due to the increased total numbers of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells, because the percentage of CD44hi CD62Llow CD8+ T cells within SIINFEKEL+ T cells was not different between the TLR7-NP and TLR–alum groups (Extended Data Fig. 5c). TLR7-NP also efficiently induced functional Granzyme-producing (Gzmb+) CD8+ T cells compared to the TLR7–alum immunization (Fig. 3e). Furthermore, TLR7-NP but not TLR7–alum immunization induced Gzmb+ CD8+ T cells in the lungs of the mice (Fig. 3f). We also confirmed that TLR7-NP led to a significant increase of Gzmb-producing, lung-tissue-resident CD8+ T cells compared with TLR7–alum at day 21 post-immunization (Fig. 3g). Altogether, TLR7-NP is superior to TLR–alum in inducing potent CD8+ T-cell responses, which play a crucial role in killing intracellular pathogen-infected cells to control viral replication.Cross-reactive and stem-specific antibody responsesThe potent effect of TLR7-NP on promoting GC responses and increasing the Tfh/Tfr ratio suggests its potential to support more diversified B-cell clones in the GCs to increase the breadth of antibody response against influenza HA. To test this possibility, we first performed the immunofluorescence staining of dLNs from mice immunized with TLR7-NP- or TLR7–alum-adjuvanted HA. The results showed that TLR7-NP induced more GCs 10 days post-immunization (Fig. 4a). We next immunized mice with TLR7-NP- or TLR7–alum-adjuvanted H3 HA from influenza strain A/Hong Kong/1/1968 (HK68), a group 2 influenza viral variant, and examined antibodies against HAs from heterologous strains at week 2 and week 5 post-immunization (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 6a). The results showed that TLR7-NP increased antibody titres against not only the H3 HA from HK68, but also the HA from another H3N2 strain, A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 (HK14). Remarkably, 80% of mice immunized with TLR7-NP-adjuvanted HK68 HA generated antibodies at week 2 against HA from H7N9 A/Shanghai/02/2013 (SH13), a highly pathogenic influenza viral variant from a different subtype. In contrast, these heterosubtypic antibodies could not be detected in the mice immunized with TLR7–alum-adjuvanted HA (Fig. 4b). We then performed a similar experiment but used group 1 HA from H1N1 A/Puerto Rico/8 (PR8) virus as immunogen. We found that TLR7-NP-adjuvanted PR8 HA also elicited significantly higher levels of antibodies against HAs of cross-subtype or even cross-group compared with the TLR7–alum-adjuvanted one (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 6b). Importantly, in contrast to TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP can promote the generation of antibodies against the conserved yet subdominant stem region (Fig. 4c). With the change of immunogen from another strain NC99 H1 HA, TLR7-NP was still able to enhance antibody responses towards the stem region as well as heterologous PR8 HA (Fig. 4d). Hence, using three different HAs as the immunogen, we demonstrated the potential of TLR7-NP as an adjuvant to overcome immunodominance to induce cross-reactive antibody responses. To further explore how TLR7-NP may affect the B-cell repertoire in GC, we sorted GC B cells from dLNs of mice 14 days post-immunization and sequenced the IgH of their BCRs. We found that BCRs from TLR7-NP elicited GCs that had a significantly higher iChao1 index than the TLR7–alum-induced ones, suggesting a more diverse BCR repertoire (Extended Data Fig. 7).Fig. 4: TLR7-NP-adjuvanted HA immunization elicits cross-reactive antibody responses and protects the mice from lethal heterologous viral challenge.a, Mice were immunized with alum-adsorbed PR8 HA (10 μg) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in either TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP at day 0. The GC response in the dLNs (day 10) was analysed by immunofluorescence. The B-cell zone and GC were stained with IgD (green) and BCL6 (red), respectively. Data show one representative LN image from two mice of each group. b–d, Mice were immunized with alum-adsorbed HA (10 μg, strain as indicated) adjuvanted by gardiquimod (20 μg) in TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP. Serum samples collected 2 weeks (b–d) and 5 weeks (d) post-immunization were analysed by ELISA for antibodies binding to HAs from homo- and heterologous strains as indicated (b–d) and to the stem region of PR8 HA (c,d). All the data are medians with each dot representing one mouse (n = 10, 7, 17 mice per group in b–d). P values were calculated by the Mann–Whitney test. e, Schematic illustration of the experimental design. f,g, The body weight changes (f) and survival (g) of mice (n = 15, 16, 14 mice for naive, TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP). The data in f are mean ± s.e.m. and are analysed by two-way analysis of variance with Sidak’s multiple-comparisons test between the TLR7–alum and TLR7-NP groups (****P < 0.0001, on day 7; **P = 0.0071, on day 8). Data in g are analysed by the log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test. h, Histological examination of the lungs from different groups of mice 14 days post-infection (top 2×, bottom 8×; scale bar, 1,000 μm). Data show one representative of at least four mice from each group. Data were combined from two independent experiments in b,d,f,g or from one representative of two independent experiments in c.Source dataFull size imageProtection against heterologous influenza viral challengeTo evaluate the capability of TLR7-NP to induce cross-protection against heterologous influenza viruses, we vaccinated mice with TLR7-NP- or TLR7–alum-adjuvanted NC99 HA at week 0 and week 3, and challenged mice with a lethal dose of PR8 H1N1 virus (a heterologous strain) at week 7 (Fig. 4e). In line with the observation of enhanced cross-reactivity and heterologous viral neutralizing ability (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 8a), TLR7-NP outperformed TLR7–alum at protecting mice from body weight loss upon heterologous viral challenge (Fig. 4f). Mice vaccinated with TLR7–alum-adjuvanted NC99 HA failed to develop effective cross-protection against PR8 H1N1 viruses as only 43.8% of the mice survived the challenge (Fig. 4g). In contrast, 92.9% of mice vaccinated with TLR7-NP-adjuvanted HA fully recovered after infection (Fig. 4g). Histological analysis further demonstrated that TLR7-NP-adjuvanted HA vaccination could fully protect the mice from infection-induced pulmonary damage (Fig. 4h). In addition, mice that received the TLR7-NP-adjuvanted vaccine had significantly higher levels of HA-stem-specific antibodies 14 days after live viral challenge compared with the mice in the TLR7–alum group (Extended Data Fig. 8b).Cross-reactive antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 variantsThe success of the influenza vaccine prompted us to explore whether TLR7-NP adjuvant could also help increase the breadth of antibody responses against SARS-CoV-2 variants. We immunized C57BL/6 mice with TLR7–alum- or TLR7-NP-adjuvanted SARS-CoV-2 spike protein from the wild-type virus (Fig. 5a) and characterized antibody responses against the wild-type RBD, spike and S1 protein, and against RBD and S1 protein from several variants of concern (Fig. 5b,c). After two immunizations, all mice immunized with TLR7-NP-adjuvanted spike developed high titres of antibodies against RBD with the N501Y mutation and RBD of the Gamma variant (P.1) and the Kappa variant (B.1.617), and against S1 protein from the Alpha (B.1.1.7) and the Beta (B.1.351) variants. In contrast, mice immunized with TLR7–alum-adjuvanted spike protein developed significantly lower antibody responses against the immunized wild-type spike protein and partial (50–60% of vaccinated mice) responses against these variants. Similarly, for two highly contagious SARS-CoV-2 variants, the Delta variant (B.1.617.2) and the Omicron variant (B.1.1.529), TLR7-NP was able to induce high titres of antibodies against its RBD domain in 77–89% of vaccinated mice, whereas only 30–50% of mice immunized with TLR7–alum-adjuvanted spike protein generated 1–2 log fold lower antibody titres (Fig. 5c). Moreover, the ELISPOT assay showed that TLR7-NP significantly increased the generation of antigen-specific bone marrow long-lived plasma cells compared to TLR7–alum 1 year post-immunization, demonstrating the long duration of humoral memory response (Fig. 5d).Fig. 5: TLR7-NP-adjuvanted SARS-CoV-2 spike immunization induces cross-reactive antibodies against multiple viral variants.a, C57BL/6 mice were immunized with the alum-adsorbed full-length SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (5 μg) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in either TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP at day 0. b,c, Serum samples were collected on week 2 and week 5 and analysed by ELISA for antibodies binding to Spike RBD, Spike S1 and Spike (wild-type strain) (b) and RBD or S1 from variants of concern (c). All the data are medians with each dot representing one mouse (n = 10, 9 mice for TLR–alum, TLR7-NP). Data are analysed by Mann–Whitney test. P values are as shown. d, TLR7-NP-adjuvanted spike vaccine in comparison with TLR7–alum-adjuvanted spike vaccine induces significantly higher spike-specific antibody-secreting cells (ASCs) in the bone marrow. Scanned ELISPOT plate images of ASCs at 1 year post-immunization assayed in bone marrow aspirate are shown (left). Quantification of the frequencies of IgG-secreting Spike-specific ASCs in bone marrow aspirates (right) (n = 2, 4, 5 mice for naive, TLR7–alum, TLR7-NP; two samples from each mouse). Data are analysed by unpaired t-test with Welch’s correction. P values are as shown. Data were combined from two independent experiments.Source dataFull size imageB-cell responses in three-dimensional human tonsil organoid culturesTo further investigate the translational potential of TLR7-NP adjuvant, we combined it with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in human tonsil organoid (TOS) cultures, using protein alone as a control40. After a 14 day culture, we found TLR7-NP-adjuvanted Spike could significantly promote Pre-GC B, GC B and plasmablast differentiation with enhanced spike-specific IgM and IgA antibody production compared with Spike alone in a subset of donors (Fig. 6a–c). We also tested the combination of TLR7-NP with a clinically tested subunit vaccine, a SARS-CoV-2 spike protein RBD nanoparticle (termed RBD-NP)41, in TOS. We performed a time-course study using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) for sorted B cells from unadjuvanted RBD-NP and TLR7-NP-adjuvanted RBD-NP TOS. Six distinct B-cell populations were identified by uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) based on their gene expression profile (Fig. 6d). Both the frequencies and number of GC B cells and plasmablasts were notably increased as early as 4 days post-stimulation with TLR7-NP-adjuvanted RBD-NP compared with RBD-NP alone or non-stimulation (NS) (Fig. 6e), consistent with our mouse studies (Fig. 3). Importantly, TLR7-NP substantially increased IgM, IgA and IgG plasmablast formation in TOS, suggesting its broad effects on the antibody isotype switching of human B cells (Fig. 6f). Gene ontology (GO) analysis further indicated that the genes associated with responses to viruses and type 1 interferon were remarkedly upregulated on 4-day-old TOS stimulated with TLR7-NP-adjuvanted RBD-NP compared to RBD-NP alone (Fig. 6g).Fig. 6: TLR7-NP-adjuvanted SARS-CoV-2 spike protein promotes B-cell differentiation and antibody response in human tonsil organoid cultures.a, Representative flow cytometry staining of B-cell phenotypes in unstimulated (NS), full-length spike-protein-only stimulated, and spike protein plus TLR7-NP-stimulated organoid cultures from one donor on day 14. Cells shown are pre-gated on total live B cells (CD45+CD19+CD3−). b, Quantification of B-cell differentiation towards pre-GC (CD38+CD27−), GC (CD38+CD27+) and plasmablast (CD38+CD27++) in NS, spike-only stimulated, and spike plus TLR7-NP-stimulated organoid cultures (n = 7 donors). c, Quantification of spike-specific IgM and IgA from NS, spike-only stimulated and spike plus TLR7-NP-stimulated culture supernatants on day 14 (n = 6 donors). P values shown were calculated by Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test. d, UMAP projection of tonsillar B-cell scRNA-seq clusters. e, Quantification of B-cell differentiation subclusters (both frequency and total cell number in organoids) in scRNA-seq. f, Frequency quantification of plasmablast subclusters in scRNA-seq. g, Gene ontologies (GO) for genes significantly upregulated in TLR7-NP plus antigen stimulated cultures versus antigen-only stimulated cultures on day 4. The top 20 GO terms are ranked by the adjusted P values.Source dataFull size imageWe then used pseudo-time trajectory analysis to better understand the machinery of plasmablast differentiation and antibody secretion stimulated by TLR7-NP. Starting from naive B cells, B-cell differentiation diverges into preGC/GC B or memory B cells, and both later converge into GC B cells, which eventually turn into plasmablasts (Extended Data Fig. 9a). TLR7-NP (red dot) enhanced the GC differentiation compared to other stimulations (grey and blue dots) (Extended Data Fig. 9b). We also observed a significant decrease in Pre-GCB, GC B and plasmablast subsets when the antigen was omitted (Extended Data Fig. 9c) or in the presence of a MyD88 inhibitor ST2825 (Extended Data Fig. 9d) in TOS, suggesting an essential role of MyD88 signalling in directly activating B-cell responses by TLR7-NP. Although the adjuvating effects from TLR7-NP in TOS were probably mediated by TLR signalling through MyD88, we cannot rule out a possible contribution of TLR-induced interleukin (IL)-1 family cytokine signalling that also uses MyD88 as an adaptor protein42.Minimized systemic toxicityWe next evaluated the possibility of adjuvant-mediated toxicity by comparing TLR7-NP to TLR7–alum. TLR7–alum rapidly diffused into circulation within 3 h after a single injection, leading to acute inflammation, characterized by multiple elevated serum inflammatory cytokines compared with TLR7-NP (Extended Data Fig. 10a, left). In particular, GROA and IL-6 maintained a high serum level 24 h post-immunization (Extended Data Fig. 10a, right). We further evaluated the long-term toxicity by clinical chemistry at 1, 4, and 7 days post-immunization. The result showed a significantly increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) enzyme level in the TLR7–alum-immunized group at day 1, indicating the acute kidney toxicities (Extended Data Fig. 10b), presumably caused by fast renal clearance of small molecular TLR7 agonist in this formulation. In contrast, TLR7-NP-adjuvanted vaccines showed negligible systemic inflammation and renal toxicity.OutlookThe immune response to vaccination is a function of a given vaccine’s spatiotemporal profile, in which the timing and localization of antigen and adjuvant control key features of vaccine-induced immunity43. Here we report a general strategy to enhance the breadth and magnitude of antibody responses elicited by vaccination, accomplished by tuning the adjuvants’ physicochemical properties to promote draining lymph node accumulation and produce a stronger and persistent stimulatory effect. This may also apply to other TLR7 agonist–adjuvants with stable particulate formulation, such as 3M-052/Alum and AS37. The TLR7-NP adjuvant presented in this study not only holds great potential for developing more potent vaccines against influenza strains or other viruses, but also provides a useful tool for understanding the complexities of immune regulation.Immunodominance in B-cell responses results from a few dominant clones outcompeting other clones in the GCs to produce long-lived memory compartments44. The induction of antibody breadth is usually associated with overcoming immunodominance45,46,47. Although the factors affecting immunodominance in the GC B-cell response are not clear, previous studies have suggested that epitope accessibility, precursor frequency, antigen affinity, T-cell help and previous antigen exposure all influence antibody immunodominance48,49,50. As shown in our study here, the significantly increased ratio of Tfh/Tfr in mice immunized with TLR7-NP might enhance T-cell help to promote the survival of subdominant B-cell clones in GCs. In addition, TLR7-NP can target dLNs and enhance the uptake of gardiquimod by B cells to promote B-cell activation and extrafollicular plasmablast response. Therefore, TLR–NP might improve the recruitment of subdominant B cells to participate in GC response to promote GC clonal diversity, as suggested by Extended Data Fig. 7.Although efforts toward vaccine development often focus on inducing effective antibody responses, it is well known that humoral and cellular immune responses synergize to enhance immune protection27. Notably, TLR7-NP generates potent CD8+ T-cell responses, which are not optimally induced by commonly used alum adjuvants in vaccines. This property could potentially accelerate the development of vaccines against pathogens that trigger substantial cellular immune responses, such as malaria, tuberculosis and leishmaniasis.One considerable hurdle of vaccine adjuvant development is eliciting a sufficiently potent immune response while meeting the special safety standard requirement for administration to the general population. The use of nanoparticles enables the spatiotemporal delivery of small molecular gardiquimod to the dLNs to enhance immune responses while reducing the likelihood of adverse systemic effects. In general, we find that our TLR7-NP has multiple favourable characteristics for drug loading, size, biocompatibility and scalability, and thus seems well suited for clinical application.MethodsAnimalsFemale C57BL/6J mice 8–12 weeks old were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory and used in all of the studies presented in this paper. All the animals were cared for in the Stanford Animal Facility under specific pathogen-free conditions, 12 h light/12 h dark cycle, temperatures of ~18–23 °C with 40–60% humidity. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the University Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal Care (APLAC, protocols 30883 and 32763). For all the mouse studies in this paper, mice were randomly distributed to different groups before treatment.Human samplesWhole tonsils from consented individuals undergoing surgery for obstructive sleep apnoea, hypertrophy or recurrent tonsillitis were collected in accordance with the Stanford University Institutional Review Board. Ethics approval was obtained from the Stanford University Institutional Review Board (protocols 30837 and 60741). Written informed consent was obtained from adult participants and from the legal guardians of children aged 0–17 years; written informed consent was also obtained from children aged 7 years and older. The participants did not receive compensation. Whole tonsils were collected after surgery, decontaminated and processed as needed for culturing40.Preparation and characterization of TLR7–PLA polymer conjugateIn a glovebox, gardiquimod (3.1 mg, 0.01 mmol) was dissolved in anhydrous THF (300 µl) and mixed with a THF solution (500 µl) containing (BDI-EI)ZnN(TMS)2 (BDI-EI is 2-((2,6-diethylphenyl) amido)-4-((2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-imino)-2-pentene) (6.5 mg, 0.01 mmol). The mixture was stirred for 15 min. Lactide (LA) (14.4 mg, 10 equiv.) was dissolved in THF (500 µl) and added to the stirred (BDI-EI)ZnN(TMS)2 mixture. The reaction proceeded in the glovebox overnight. After LA was completely consumed, the reaction was stopped by quenching the polymerization solution with cold methanol solution (30 µl). The polymer was precipitated with ether (10 ml), collected by centrifugation and dried by vacuum. The molecular weights of polymer conjugates are characterized by gel permeation chromatography experiments, determined from the dn/dc value assuming 100% mass recovery using ASTRA 7 software (v.7.1.3.15, Wyatt Technology).Whole-mouse and lymph node fluorescence imagingMice were subcutaneously (s.c.) immunized with alum-adsorbed OVA (50 μg) mixed with either AF647-labelled TLR7–alum or AF647-labelled TLR7-NP (equivalent gardiquimod dose, 20 nmol) in 100 µl PBS at tail base. Signals of AF647 were measured with a longitudinal whole-animal in vivo Lago spectral imaging system from day 0 to day 3. Images were collected on a Largo X imaging system and analysed with Aura imaging software (Spectral Instruments Imaging). Total radiance at the s.c. injection site was normalized to the initial fluorescence signal at day 0 taken 30 min after injection. Inguinal dLNs were excised at various time points and whole-tissue fluorescence was measured by a Lago spectral imaging system at an excitation wavelength of 640 nm and an emission wavelength of 690 nm. Values represent the integrated fluorescence intensity.Cellular uptake studyMice were s.c. immunized with alum-adsorbed OVA (some are labelled with AF488 as noted, 50 μg) mixed with either AF647-labelled TLR7–alum or AF647-labelled TLR7-NP (equivalent gardiquimod dose, 20 nmol) in 100 µl PBS at tail base. Inguinal dLNs were collected and gently dissociated with a 3-ml syringe plunger thumb rest and digested with 1 mg ml−1 collagenase type 4 for 20–25 min at 37 °C. Reactions were stopped with 2 mM EDTA and single-cell suspensions were prepared by passing through 40 µm cell strainers. The cells were stained with Ghost Dye Violet 510 (Tonbo Biosciences), and then washed, blocked with Fc-blocker (clone 2.4G2, BD Bioscience) before staining with markers, including CD8 (clone 53.67, BD Biosciences), PDCA1 (clone 927, BD Biosciences), Ly6C (clone HK1.4, Biolegend), CD11b (clone M1/70, Biolegend), CD138 (clone 281-2, BD Biosciences), CD11c (clone N418, Biolegend), MHCII (clone M5/114.15.2, Biolegend), Ly6G (clone 1A8, Biolegend), F4/80 (clone BM8, Biolegend), CD40 (clone 3/23, Biolegend), SiglecF (clone E50-2440, BD Biosciences), CD103 (clone 2-E7, eBioscience), CD19 (clone 1D3, Biolegend) and CD86 (clone P03, Biolegend), and then fixed with 1.5% PFA, and collected using BD FACS Diva v.8.01 software associated with a BD LSRII flow cytometer. Data were analysed with FlowJo 10 software. The gating strategy for cells of myeloid lineage is shown in Extended Data Fig. 3. B cells were gated on live, single CD19− CD3+ cells.Phenotypic analysis of B cells and follicular T cellsMice were s.c. immunized with alum-adsorbed NP–OVA (50 µg) and TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP (equivalent gardiquimod dose, 20 µg) in 100 µl PBS at tail base. Inguinal dLNs were excised at day 4, day 7, day 14 and day 22 to prepare single-cell suspensions. For flow cytometry analysis of GC B cells, follicular T cells (TFH) and plasmablasts, cells from the dLNs were stained with Ghost Dye Violet 510 (Tonbo Biosciences). Cells were then washed and blocked with Fc-blocker (clone 2.4G2, BD Bioscience) prior to staining with markers, including CD19 (clone 1D3/CD19, Biolegend), CD38 (clone 90, BD Biosciences), CD95 (clone Jo2, BD Biosciences), CD138 (clone 281-2, BD Biosciences), CD44 (clone IM7, BioLegend), CD3 (clone 17A2, BioLegend), CD4 (clone GK1.5, BioLegend), CXCR5 (clone L138D7, BioLegend) and PD1 (clone 29F.1A12, BioLegend). After staining, cells were washed and fixed with 1.5% PFA. Stained cells were collected using BD FACS Diva v8.01 software associated with a BD LSRII flow cytometer. Data were analysed with FlowJo 10 software. The gating strategy consisted of gating GCBC on live single CD3−CD19+CD95+CD38− cells, TFH on live single CD19−CD3+CD4+CXCR5+PD1hi, and plasmablasts on live single CD138+CD44+ cells.Phenotypic and functional analysis of T cellsFor analysis of T cells, cells from dLNs were collected and prepared as single-cell suspensions. The cells were washed, blocked with Fc-blocker (clone 2.4G2, BD Bioscience) on ice for 10 min, and stained with PE-labelled H2-Kb-SIINFEKL tetramer (MBL International) at room temperature for 1 h. Cells were then washed twice and blocked with Fc-blocker (clone 2.4G2, BD Bioscience), stained with LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain and surface markers, including CD45 (clone 30-F11, BioLegend), TCRβ chain (clone H57-597, Biolegend), CD3 (clone 17A2, BioLegend), CD8α (clone 53-6.7, BD Biosciences), CD4 (clone GK1.5, BD Biosciences), CD44 (clone IM7, BioLegend), CD62L (clone MFL−14, BioLegend) and CD69 (clone H1.2F3, BioLegend), and analysed on a BD LSRII flow cytometer. For functional analysis, cells from dLNs were plated in 24-well plates in complete T-cell media with eBioscience Cell Stimulation Cocktail (plus protein transport inhibitors) for 5 h. After stimulation, the cells were collected, washed, blocked with Fc-blocker and then stained with LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain and surface markers, including CD45 (clone 30-F11, BioLegend), CD3 (clone 17A2, BioLegend), TCRβ chain (clone H57-597, Biolegend), CD4 (clone GK1.5, BD Biosciences), CD8α (clone 53-6.7, BD Biosciences) and CD279 (PD-1) (clone 29F.1A12, BioLegend), and then fixed using eBioscience Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were then washed, permeabilized, stained for function markers, including Foxp3 (clone MF-14, Biolegend), IFN-γ (clone XMG 1.2, Biolegend), Granzyme B (clone QA16A02, Biolegend) and BCL6 (clone K112-91, BD Biosciences), and collected using BD FACS Diva v.8.01 software associated with a BD LSRII flow cytometer. Data were analysed with FlowJo 10 software. For the gating strategy, Tem SIINFEKL+ CD8 T cells were gated on live single CD3+TCRβ+CD4−CD8+ SIINFEKL+CD44+CD62L− cells, CD69hi SIINFEKL+ CD8 T cells were gated on CD3+TCRβ+CD4−CD8+ SIINFEKL+CD69+ cells, and Gzmb+CD8 T cells were gated on CD3+TCRβ+CD4−CD8+ Gzmb+ cells. Regulatory follicular T cells (Tfr) were gated on CD3+ CD4+ CD8−BCL6+PD1hi FoxP3+ cells.Mouse lung tissue isolation and processingLung isolation was performed as described51,52 with some modifications. Briefly, killed mice were perfused via the right cardiac ventricle with PBS. Harvested lungs were dissected into gentleMACS C tubes (Miltenyi) containing 4 ml of a mixture of collagenase (25 μg ml−1 liberaseM, Roche) and DNaseI (10 μg ml−1, Sigma) in PBS containing 2% FBS. Then lungs were dissociated with a preset program m_lung_02_01 using a gentleMACS octo dissociator (Miltenyi) and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Then they were homogenized with the gentleMACS program m_lung_02_01 in the presence of 10 mM EDTA. Single-cell suspensions were prepared with 100 μm cell strainers. Red blood cells were lysed with Ack lysing buffer (Gibco). Cells were resuspended in 4 ml 36% Percoll (GE Healthcare) and washed once for further experiments. To further distinguish T cells in the lung vasculature versus the lung parenchyma, mice were injected with 3 µg APC-conjugated anti-mouse CD8α antibody (clone 53-6.7, Biolegend) through tail vein injection 3 min before lung perfusion and dissection. The single-cell suspension was stimulated, fixed and stained with antibodies for anti-CD16/CD32 (clone 2.4G2, BD Biosciences), CD45 (clone 30-F11, BioLegend), TCRβ (clone H57-597, Biolegend), CD3 (clone 17A2, BioLegend), CD8α (BUV805, clone 53-6.7, BD Biosciences), CD4 (clone GK1.5, BD Biosciences), CD44 (clone IM7, BioLegend), CD62L (clone MFL-14, BioLegend) and Granzyme B (clone QA16A02, Biolegend). Data were collected using BD FACS Diva v.8.01 software associated with a BD LSRII flow cytometer. Gzmb+CD8 T cells in the lungs were gated on single live CD45+CD3+TCRβ+CD4−CD8+ Gzmb+ cells and Gzmb+ lung tissue-resident CD8 T cells were gated on CD45+CD3+ TCRβ+CD8(APC)−CD8(BUV805)+ Gzmb+ cells.ImmunofluorescenceCryostat sections (7 μm) made from OCT (TissueTek) embedded dLNs were fixed with 2% PFA for 20 min, and then washed and blocked in blocking buffer (PBS with 1% BSA, 0.3% Triton-100, Fc-blocker and 5% rat serum and mouse serum). Sections were then stained in blocking buffer with biotin-labelled anti-mouse IgD (clone 11-26c, eBioscience) and PE-labelled anti-mouse BCL6 antibodies (clone K112-91, BD Biosciences), and subsequently stained with AF488-conjugated streptavidin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fluorescent images were captured using a 4× objective on a fluorescence microscope (Keyence).For imaging the distribution of TLR7-NP in the dLNs, AF647-labelled TLR7-NP was s.c. injected into mice (n = 2) at the tail base. dLNs were harvested 48 h later. Tissue sections were stained with anti-mouse IgD_Al488 (clone 11-26c, SouthernBiotech), CD4_BV421 (clone GK1.5, BioLegend) and CD35_biotin (clone 8C12, BD Biosciences). Streptavidin_A555 (Invitrogen, catalogue number S32355, 1:100) was used to detect biotin. Images were captured using a 20× objective on a fluorescence microscope (Leica, DMi8).ELISA analysis of antibody titresMice were s.c. immunized with alum-adsorbed recombinant HA (10 µg) or recombinant full-length SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (5 µg) with TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP (equivalent gardiquimod dose, 20 µg) in 100 µl PBS at tail base at week 0 and boosted at week 3. Sera were collected by face bleeding 2 weeks following either priming or boosting for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) assays to measure anti-HA titres or anti-SARS-CoV-2 titres. High protein binding plates (Costar) were directly coated with the antigen of interest (2 µg ml−1, 50 µl) overnight. The plates were blocked with the blocking buffer for 1 h, washed and cultured with diluted mouse sera (1:500 or 1:2,500) for 2 h. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibodies to IgG (SouthernBiotech, 1031-05, 1:4,000) was used to detect bound antibodies. Plates were developed with TMB substrate solution (Thermo Scientific), quenched with sulfuric acid and read at 450 nm with a microplate reader (Bio-Rad). In all ELISA assays, unvaccinated mouse serum was used as negative control.Influenza viral challengeMice were s.c. immunized with alum-adsorbed H1 (NC99, 10 µg) mixed with TLR7–alum or TLR7-NP (equivalent gardiquimod dose, 20 µg) in 100 µl PBS at tail base. At week 7, the immunized mice were anaesthetized and intratracheally infected with the heterologous influenza A/PR/8/34 H1N1 (Charles River, catalogue number 10100374, lot number 4XP201023) in 20 μl sterile PBS (1/40,000 dilution from 107 p.f.u. per ml virus stock). Virus titres in the stock were determined with plaque assay; detailed methods are described in the Supplementary Information. Body weight and survival of mice were monitored for 12 days after the challenge. The endpoint was defined as a body weight drop >25.5% or natural death. The body weight drop curve stopped when n > 2 mice died in the group.ELISPOT analysisBone marrow ELISPOTs were performed at week 52 after immunizations according to the manufacturer’s instructions (MabTech). The plates were generally coated with antigens (5 µg ml−1, 50–100 µl) overnight at 4 °C. Then the plates were washed and blocked for the ELISPOT assays. Single cells were isolated from bone marrow of both upper and lower leg bones and further incubated with prepared antigen-coated plates at 37 °C for 18 h. After washing the plates, an HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody (SouthernBiotech, 1031-05, 1:2,500) was added, and antigen-specific responses were detected by the detection kit (BD Biosciences, number 551951).Human tonsil organoid stimulationThe tonsil cells were cryopreserved as previously described40. Cryopreserved cells from seven paediatric donors (including both male and female, aged from 5 to 10 years old) and one adult donor (male, 68 years old) were thawed and cultured. For culture of cryopreserved cells, aliquots were thawed into complete medium, enumerated and resuspended to 6 × 106 cells per ml. Cells were plated, 100 μl per well, into permeable (0.4 μm pore size) membranes (24-well size PTFE or polycarbonate membranes in standard 12-well plates with single-well receiver trays; Corning or Millipore), with the lower chamber consisting of complete medium (1 ml) supplemented with 0.5 μg ml−1 of recombinant human B-cell-activating factor (BAFF; BioLegend) every 3 or 4 days. Antigen including either full-length SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (2.5 μg per well) or RBD-NP (2.0 μg per well) with or without adjuvant TLR7-NPs (5 μg per well) was added directly to the cell-containing portion of the culture set-up. Some experiments also involved the ST2825 inhibitor. Cultures were incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 with humidity. Cells from organoids were harvested after 14 day culture, stained with Human TruStain FcX (Biolegend), LIVE/DEAD Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain and surface markers, including CD45 (clone HI30, Biolegend), CD3 (clone HIT3a, Biolegend), CD19 (clone 4G7, Biolegend), CD8 (clone SK1, BD Biosciences), CD4 (clone RPA-T4, BioLegend), CD38 (clone HB-7 Biolegend) and CD27 (clone LG.3A10, Biolegend), and analysed by flow cytometry. Gating strategy: preGC B cells (CD45+CD19+CD3−CD38+CD27−), GC B cells (CD45+CD19+CD3−CD38+CD27mid), plasmablasts (CD45+CD19+CD3−CD38+CD27hi). Supernatants from the lower chamber were harvested for measuring SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific antibodies by ELISA. HRP-conjugated anti-human secondary antibodies to IgA and IgM (SouthernBiotech, IgA catalogue number 2050-05, IgM catalogue number 2020-05) were used to detect bound antibodies.BD Rhapsody single-cell targeted RNA sequencing and data analysisTonsil organoid cells from one donor (a 6-year-old female) cultured for different numbers of days and with different stimulants were FACS-sorted, library prepared and sequenced in one batch. They were first stained with oligonucleotide-conjugated Sample Tags (BD Human Single-Cell Multiplexing Kit, catalogue number 633781) and LIVE/DEAD Aqua Zombie stain, and with surface markers following the manufacturers’ protocol. Live B cells (CD45+CD19+CD3−) were FACS-sorted from the barcoded samples and pooled. Barcoded samples were then washed and spun down at 350g for 10 min and pooled. The pooled sample was then stained concurrently with a panel of 32 oligonucleotide-conjugated antibodies for the AbSeq Stain in BD stain buffer for 30 min on ice. Samples were then spun down at 350g for 10 min and washed three times. The pellet was resuspended in Rhapsody Sample Buffer for cell capture. Cell capture and library preparation were completed using the BD Rhapsody Targeted mRNA and AbSeq Reagent Kit (catalogue number 633774). Briefly, cells were captured with beads in a microwell plate, followed by cell lysis, bead retrieval, cDNA synthesis, template switching and Klenow extension, and library preparation in the Stanford Human Immune Monitoring Centre following the BD Rhapsody protocol. Libraries were prepared for sample tags, AbSeq and targeted mRNA using the customized Immune Response panel. Sequencing was completed on a NovaSeq (Illumina) at Novogene USA.The Rhapsody raw data were first preprocessed by the Seven Bridges Genomics online platform using the BD Rhapsody Targeted Analysis Pipeline to align genes and calculate molecular counts with molecular index correction. After the preprocessing, the single-cell Rhapsody count tables, which were composed of 493 genes and 32 surface markers from the different time points, and the stimulants were imported in Seurat package of R (v.4.2.1)53 for the following processing. Both the gene and abseq counts were log1p transformed. Principal component analysis with 30 dimensions was used to dimensionally reduce the gene and abseq combined count data. Graphically based clustering and manual annotation were applied to identify B-cell subsets. To identify the genes that are significantly differentially expressed between the two treatments, we used Wilcoxon rank-sum tests54 with the Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted P-values below 0.05 and absolute values of the log2 of the fold change between the average expression of the raw molecular counts above 0.25. The ‘biological processes’ GO terms of the significantly differentially expressed genes were calculated using DAVID55,56 and the GO terms were shown with a false discovery rate of <0.05. To estimate the B-cell differentiation lineage, we ran the pseudotime trajectory analysis using tSpace in R57. tSpace used the top 50 principal components of the dataset we obtained earlier as the input. The output is a multidimensional trajectory space in which each cell–cell distance represents their lineage pseudotime distance. This pseudotime trajectory cell space is then visualized using the dimensionality reduction visualization UMAP plot to best present the B-cell differentiation lineage.Bulk BCR sequencing and diversity calculationMice (n = 3 per group) were immunized with TLR7–alum- or TLR7-NP-adjuvanted recombinant HA (H1 HA PR8) as described above. GC B cells were sorted from draining lymph nodes of immunized mice 14 days post-immunization and DNA was extracted using a QIAmp DNA Micro Kit (Qiagen). Sequencing of mouse IgH chains was performed using the immunoSEQ Assay (Adaptive Biotechnologies). The diversity index iChao1 is calculated using the Adaptive Biotechnologies Immuoseq Analyzer software. iChao1 is a non-parametric estimator of the lower bound of the total number of unique templates within an individual’s repertoire. The lower bound is the minimum number of unique templates predicted to be within an individual’s repertoire, with a 95% confidence interval58,59,60.Statistics and reproducibilityStatistics were analysed using GraphPad Prism9 software. Detailed statistical analysis methods are included in the figure legends. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes, but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous publications. Data distribution was assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested. Data are either combined from multiple individual experiments or were from one representative of at least two individual experiments. One mouse in the SARS-CoV-2 immunization study was euthanized by staff due to skin lesions, and was therefore excluded from analyses. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability Data supporting the findings of this study are available in the article and its supplementary files. Single-cell RNA sequencing data are deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE217918. Bulk BCR sequencing data are deposited in https://clients.adaptivebiotech.com/immuneaccess with https://doi.org/10.21417/QY2022NM. Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability The custom code for analysing tonsil single-cell RNA-seq data is available at https://github.comtsunmeng/scRNA-seq-codes/blob/mainonsil_organoid_Bcell_IMD090_RBDNP_TLR7NP.R. The standard code for plotting serum cytokine with seaborn.heatmap of python is available upon request. ReferencesPollard, A. J. & Bijker, E. M. A guide to vaccinology: from basic principles to new developments. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21, 83–100 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Krammer, F. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development. Nature 586, 516–527 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Innis, B. L. et al. Meeting report: Convening on the influenza human viral challenge model for universal influenza vaccines, part 1: value; challenge virus selection; regulatory, industry and ethical considerations; increasing standardization, access and capacity. Vaccine 37, 4823–4829 (2019).Article Google Scholar Mlcochova, P. et al. SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617.2 Delta variant replication and immune evasion. Nature 599, 114–119 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Planas, D. et al. Reduced sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 variant Delta to antibody neutralization. Nature 596, 276–280 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Abdool Karim, S. S. & de Oliveira, T. New SARS-CoV-2 variants—clinical, public health, and vaccine implications. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 1866–1868 (2021).Article Google Scholar Ellebedy, A. H. et al. Induction of broadly cross-reactive antibody responses to the influenza HA stem region following H5N1 vaccination in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 13133–13138 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Tan, H. X. et al. Subdominance and poor intrinsic immunogenicity limit humoral immunity targeting influenza HA stem. J. Clin. Invest. 129, 850–862 (2019).Article Google Scholar Lopez-Sagaseta, J., Malito, E., Rappuoli, R. & Bottomley, M. J. Self-assembling protein nanoparticles in the design of vaccines. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 14, 58–68 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Haynes, J. R. Influenza virus-like particle vaccines. Expert Rev. Vaccines 8, 435–445 (2009).Article CAS Google Scholar Schwartzman, L. M. et al. An intranasal virus-like particle vaccine broadly protects mice from multiple subtypes of influenza A virus. mBio 6, e01044 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Boyoglu-Barnum, S. et al. Quadrivalent influenza nanoparticle vaccines induce broad protection. Nature 592, 623–628 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Yassine, H. M. et al. Hemagglutinin-stem nanoparticles generate heterosubtypic influenza protection. Nat. Med. 21, 1065–1070 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Impagliazzo, A. et al. A stable trimeric influenza hemagglutinin stem as a broadly protective immunogen. Science 349, 1301–1306 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Steel, J. et al. Influenza virus vaccine based on the conserved hemagglutinin stalk domain. mBio 1, e00018–10 (2010).Article Google Scholar Mallajosyula, V. V. et al. Influenza hemagglutinin stem-fragment immunogen elicits broadly neutralizing antibodies and confers heterologous protection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, E2514–E2523 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Reed, S. G., Orr, M. T. & Fox, C. B. Key roles of adjuvants in modern vaccines. Nat. Med. 19, 1597–1608 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Pulendran, B., Arunachalam, P. S. & O'Hagan, D. T. Emerging concepts in the science of vaccine adjuvants. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 20, 454–475 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Khurana, S. et al. MF59 adjuvant enhances diversity and affinity of antibody-mediated immune response to pandemic influenza vaccines. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 85ra48 (2011).Article Google Scholar He, P., Zou, Y. & Hu, Z. Advances in aluminum hydroxide-based adjuvant research and its mechanism. Hum. Vaccin. Immunother. 11, 477–488 (2015).Article Google Scholar Maisonneuve, C., Bertholet, S., Philpott, D. J. & De Gregorio, E. Unleashing the potential of NOD- and Toll-like agonists as vaccine adjuvants. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 12294–12299 (2014).Article CAS Google Scholar Wille-Reece, U. et al. HIV Gag protein conjugated to a Toll-like receptor 7/8 agonist improves the magnitude and quality of Th1 and CD8+ T cell responses in nonhuman primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15190–15194 (2005).Wille-Reece, U. et al. Toll-like receptor agonists influence the magnitude and quality of memory T cell responses after prime-boost immunization in nonhuman primates. J. Exp. Med. 203, 1249–1258 (2006).Article CAS Google Scholar Kasturi, S. P. et al. Programming the magnitude and persistence of antibody responses with innate immunity. Nature 470, 543–547 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Kasturi, S. P. et al. Adjuvanting a Simian Immunodeficiency Virus Vaccine with Toll-Like Receptor Ligands Encapsulated in Nanoparticles Induces Persistent Antibody Responses and Enhanced Protection in TRIM5α Restrictive Macaques. J. Virol. 91, e01844–16 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Om, K. et al. Adjuvanted HIV-1 vaccine promotes antibody-dependent phagocytic responses and protects against heterologous SHIV challenge. PLoS Pathog. 16, e1008764 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Arunachalam, P. S. et al. T cell-inducing vaccine durably prevents mucosal SHIV infection even with lower neutralizing antibody titers. Nat. Med. 26, 932–940 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Vasilakos, J. P. & Tomai, M. A. The use of Toll-like receptor 7/8 agonists as vaccine adjuvants. Expert Rev. Vaccines 12, 809–819 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Kasturi, S. P. et al. 3M-052, a synthetic TLR-7/8 agonist, induces durable HIV-1 envelope-specific plasma cells and humoral immunity in nonhuman primates. Sci. Immunol. 5, eabb1025 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Petitdemange, C. et al. Vaccine induction of antibodies and tissue-resident CD8+ T cells enhances protection against mucosal SHIV-infection in young macaques. JCI Insight 4, e126047 (2019).Article Google Scholar Pino, M. et al. A yeast expressed RBD-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine formulated with 3M-052-alum adjuvant promotes protective efficacy in non-human primates. Sci. Immunol. 6, eabh3634 (2021).Article Google Scholar Fox, C. B. et al. Adsorption of a synthetic TLR7/8 ligand to aluminum oxyhydroxide for enhanced vaccine adjuvant activity: a formulation approach. J. Control. Release 244, 98–107 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Arunachalam, P. S. et al. Adjuvanting a subunit COVID-19 vaccine to induce protective immunity. Nature 594, 253–258 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Gonzalez-Lopez, A. et al. Adjuvant effect of TLR7 agonist adsorbed on aluminum hydroxide (AS37): a phase I randomized, dose escalation study of an AS37-adjuvanted meningococcal C conjugated vaccine. Clin. Immunol. 209, 108275 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Yin, Q. et al. Pamidronate functionalized nanoconjugates for targeted therapy of focal skeletal malignant osteolysis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E4601–E4609 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Yin, Q. et al. Drug-initiated ring-opening polymerization of O-carboxyanhydrides for the preparation of anticancer drug-poly(O-carboxyanhydride) nanoconjugates. Biomacromolecules 14, 920–929 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Yin, Q., Yin, L., Wang, H. & Cheng, J. Synthesis and biomedical applications of functional poly(α-hydroxy acids) via ring-opening polymerization of O-carboxyanhydrides. Acc. Chem. Res. 48, 1777–1787 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Shlomchik, M. J., Luo, W. & Weisel, F. Linking signaling and selection in the germinal center. Immunol. Rev. 288, 49–63 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Chung, Y. et al. Follicular regulatory T cells expressing Foxp3 and Bcl-6 suppress germinal center reactions. Nat. Med. 17, 983–988 (2011).Article CAS Google Scholar Wagar, L. E. et al. Modeling human adaptive immune responses with tonsil organoids. Nat. Med. 27, 125–135 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Walls, A. C. et al. Elicitation of potent neutralizing antibody responses by designed protein nanoparticle vaccines for SARS-CoV-2. Cell 183, 1367–1382 e1317 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Deguine, J. & Barton, G. M. MyD88: a central player in innate immune signaling. F1000Prime Rep. 6, 97 (2014).Irvine, D. J., Swartz, M. A. & Szeto, G. L. Engineering synthetic vaccines using cues from natural immunity. Nat. Mater. 12, 978–990 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Luo, W. & Yin, Q. B cell response to vaccination. Immunol. Invest. 50, 780–801 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Victora, G. D. & Wilson, P. C. Germinal center selection and the antibody response to influenza. Cell 163, 545–548 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Havenar-Daughton, C., Lee, J. H. & Crotty, S. Tfh cells and HIV bnAbs, an immunodominance model of the HIV neutralizing antibody generation problem. Immunol. Rev. 275, 49–61 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Mesin, L., Ersching, J. & Victora, G. D. Germinal center B cell dynamics. Immunity 45, 471–482 (2016).Article CAS Google Scholar Abbott, R. K. & Crotty, S. Factors in B cell competition and immunodominance. Immunol. Rev. 296, 120–131 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Akram, A. & Inman, R. D. Immunodominance: a pivotal principle in host response to viral infections. Clin. Immunol. 143, 99–115 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Abbott, R. K. et al. Precursor frequency and affinity determine B cell competitive fitness in germinal centers, tested with germline-targeting HIV vaccine immunogens. Immunity 48, 133–146 e136 (2018).Article CAS Google Scholar Brandes, M., Klauschen, F., Kuchen, S. & Germain, R. N. A systems analysis identifies a feedforward inflammatory circuit leading to lethal influenza infection. Cell 154, 197–212 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Sinclair, C. et al. mTOR regulates metabolic adaptation of APCs in the lung and controls the outcome of allergic inflammation. Science 357, 1014–1021 (2017).Article CAS Google Scholar Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902 e1821 (2019).Article CAS Google Scholar Mou, T., Deng, W., Gu, F., Pawitan, Y. & Vu, T. N. Reproducibility of methods to detect differentially expressed genes from single-cell RNA sequencing. Front. Genet. 10, 1331 (2019).Huang da, W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, 1–13 (2009).Article Google Scholar Huang da, W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat. Protoc. 4, 44–57 (2009).Article Google Scholar Dermadi, D. et al. Exploration of cell development pathways through high-dimensional single cell analysis in trajectory space. iScience 23, 100842 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Chiu, C. H., Wang, Y. T., Walther, B. A. & Chao, A. An improved nonparametric lower bound of species richness via a modified Good–Turing frequency formula. Biometrics 70, 671–682 (2014).Article Google Scholar Spassova, I. et al. Predominance of central memory T cells with high T-cell receptor repertoire diversity is associated with response to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition in merkel cell carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 26, 2257–2267 (2020).Article CAS Google Scholar Carey, A. J. et al. Public clonotypes and convergent recombination characterize the naive CD8+ T-cell receptor repertoire of extremely preterm neonates. Front. Immunol. 8, 1859 (2017).Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank X. Ji and M. Miranda for single-cell RNA-seq help, and the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), the Stanford Shared FACS Facility and the Human Immune Monitoring Centre at Stanford for assistance with this study, and members of the Davis laboratory for helpful advice and discussions. We thank N. King’s group at the University of Washington for providing the SARS-CoV-2 antigen RBD-NP. We thank C. Yao for helping with schematic illustration. We are grateful for the support of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and NIAID AI057229 (to M.M.D.), and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation INV003875 Discovery Hubs and Networks and OPP1113682 Centre for Human Systems Immunology (M.M.D.). We acknowledge the National Institutes of Health (grants R37 DK057665, R37 AI048638, U19 AI090023 and U19 AI057266), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Soffer Fund endowment and Open Philanthropy to B.P. for supporting this work in B.P.’s laboratory.Author informationAuthor notesWei LuoPresent address: Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USALisa E. WagarPresent address: Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USAThese authors contributed equally: Qian Yin, Wei Luo.Authors and AffiliationsInstitute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USAQian Yin, Wei Luo, Vamsee Mallajosyula, Meng Sun, Rohit Verma, Chunfeng Li, Christian M. Constantz, Lisa E. Wagar, Jing Li, Elsa Sola, Neha Gupta, Chunlin Wang, Oliver Kask, Xin Chen, Yueh-hsiu Chien, Bali Pulendran & Mark M. DavisDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USAYang Bo & Jianjun ChengDepartment of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USAJing Guo, Yueh-hsiu Chien, Bali Pulendran & Mark M. DavisMolecular Imaging Program at Stanford, Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USAJinghang Xie & Jianghong RaoDepartment of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USAXue YuanDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USANicholas C. WuDepartment of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USAJianghong RaoDepartment of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USABali PulendranThe Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USAMark M. DavisAuthorsQian YinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWei LuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarVamsee MallajosyulaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYang BoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJing GuoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJinghang XieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMeng SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRohit VermaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChunfeng LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChristian M. ConstantzView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLisa E. WagarView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJing LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElsa SolaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNeha GuptaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChunlin WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarOliver KaskView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXin ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXue YuanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNicholas C. WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJianghong RaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYueh-hsiu ChienView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJianjun ChengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBali PulendranView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMark M. DavisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsQ.Y., W.L., B.P. and M.M.D. conceived the project and guided it throughout. Q.Y., W.L., Y.B., J.G., J.X., M.S., R.V., C.L., C.M.C., L.E.W., J.L., C.W., O.K., X.C. and X.Y. performed the experiments or data analysis. V.M. designed and produced antigens. E.S. and N.G. assisted with human tonsil tissue processing. N.C.W. provided the unique antigens. J.R., Y.C. and J.C. contributed to the conceptual design of the study. Q.Y., W.L. and M.M.D. wrote the paper.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Bali Pulendran or Mark M. Davis.Ethics declarations Competing interests Q.Y., M.M.D., W.L. and B.P. are inventors on a patent application that describes the use of this nanoparticle for vaccine adjuvant. The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Materials thanks Ed Lavelle and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Extended dataExtended Data Fig. 1 Characterization of synthesized gardiquimod-polylactide (TLR7−PLA) polymer.(a) GPC analysis of gardiquimod-LAn, equipped with dRI detector. (b) MALDI-TOF MS analysis of gardiquimod-LAn. The obtained m/z is identical to the calculated m/z of gardiquimod (+Na+)-LAn (336.3 + 144.08*n). Matrix:HCCA.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 2 Characterization of AF647-gardiquimod and AF647-gardiquimod (TLR7)-PLA polymer.(a) ESI-MS analysis of AF647-gardiquimod. Observed 1154.36 M+H+ (b) MALDI-TOF MS analysis of AF647-TLR7-LAn. The obtained m/z is identical to the calculated m/z of AF647-gardiquimod (+K+)-LAn (1192.36 + 144.04*n). Matrix:DMB.Extended Data Fig. 3 Gating strategy for flow cytometry analysis of DCs and cells of monocytic lineage.Representative flow plots of mouse lymph node samples gated for single cells, live cells, cDC1, cDC2, pDC, inflammatory monocytes, and macrophage cells.Extended Data Fig. 4 TLR7-NP deposited to B cell follicles and was internalized into antigen-specific B cells.(a) Immunofluorescence staining of dLNs 2 days post immunization. B cell zone, T cell zone and FDC network were stained with IgD, CD4 and CD35 antibodies, respectively. AF647-labelled TLR7-NP is shown in white colour. Tissue sections were collected from two biologically independent samples. (b) C57BL/6 mice (n = 4 mice per group) were immunized with AF488-labelled OVA (50 μg) plus AF647-labelled gardiquimod (AF647-TLR7, 20 nmol) in either TLR7-Alum or TLR7-NP. The cellular internalization of OVA and TLR7 by B cells from dLNs were measured by flow cytometry 24 h post immunization. Shown are representative flow plots (gated on single live B cells) and the corresponding quantification of TLR7+OVA+ B cells versus total OVA+ B cells. Data are mean ± SEM, P value is determined by two-sided, unpaired t test with Welch’s correction.Extended Data Fig. 5 TLR7-NP promoted humoral and cellular immune responses.C57BL/6 mice were immunized with Alum-adsorbed NP-OVA (50 μg) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in either TLR7-Alum or TLR7-NPs on Day 0. (a) Serum samples from immunized mice (n = 4 mice per group) collected 2 weeks and 3 weeks post immunization were analysed by ELISA for the ratio of IgG antibodies binding to NP2-BSA and NP14-BSA. P values are determined by two-sided, paired t test. (b, c) Representative flow cytometry plots of antigen-specific activated (CD69hi) and effector memory (CD44hi CD62Llo) CD8+ T cells and on Day 7. Cells are gated on SIINFEKEL-tetramer+ CD8+ T cells.Extended Data Fig. 6 TLR7-NP adjuvanted HA vaccination elicited cross-reactive antibodies.C57BL/6 mice (n = 10 mice per group in a, n = 7 mice per group in b) were immunized with Alum-adsorbed HA (10 μg, strain as indicated in a and b) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in TLR7-Alum or TLR7-NP. Serum samples collected five weeks post immunization were analysed by ELISA for antibodies binding to HAs from homo- and heterologous strains as indicated. All the data are medians with each dot representing one mouse. P values were calculated by Mann-Whitney Test.Extended Data Fig. 7 Comparing clonal diversity of GC B cells from TLR7-Alum and TLR7-NP immunized mice.C57BL/6 mice (n = 3 per group) were immunized with Alum-adsorbed PR8-HA (10 μg) adjuvanted by gardiquimod (20 μg) in TLR7-Alum or TLR7-NP. BCRs of GC B cells sorted from the draining LNs14 days post immunization were sequenced by mouse IGH assay. Bar graph showing iChao1 index of BCRs. Data are mean ± SEM. P value is determined using two-sided, unpaired student t-test.Extended Data Fig. 8 Serum analysis of mice immunized with TLR7-NP or TLR7-Alum adjuvanted HA.(a) Neutralization ability of H1N1 A/Puerto Rico/8/34 virus by sera from mice vaccinated with Alum-adsorbed HA of H1HA (NC99) (10 μg) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in either TLR7-Alum (n = 9 mice) or TLR7-NP (n = 10 mice) at week 5 post immunization. All the data are medians with each dot representing one mouse. P values were calculated by two-sided, unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. (b) Mice were immunized with Alum-adsorbed H1HA (NC99) (10 μg) adjuvanted by gardiquimod (20 μg) in TLR7-Alum or TLR7-NP. Serum samples (n = 13 mice from TLR7-Alum group, n = 14 mice from TLR7-NP group) collected 14 days post viral challenge of H1N1 A/Puerto Rico/8/34 virus were analysed by ELISA for antibodies binding to stem region of PR8 HA. All the data are medians with each dot representing one mouse. P values were calculated by Mann-Whitney Test.Extended Data Fig. 9 TLR7-NP adjuvanted SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccine in human tonsil organoids.(a, b) Trajectory space (tSpace) projections of all B cell differentiation lineages from unstimulated (NS), RBD-NP only stimulated, and RBD-NP plus TLR7-NP stimulated tonsil organoids. Data was collected by one single BD Rhapsody single-cell targeted RNA sequencing experiment. (c) Flow cytometry staining of B cell phenotypes in NS, RBD-NP only stimulated, RBD-NP plus TLR7-NP stimulated, and TLR7-NP only stimulated organoid cultures from one representative of three donors on Day 8 (left) and the corresponding quantification of B cell differentiation towards pre-GC (CD38+CD27-), GC (CD38+CD27+), and plasmablast (CD38+CD27++) in all organoid cultures (right). (d) Flow cytometry staining of B cell phenotypes in NS, SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (spike) only stimulated, spike plus TLR7-NP stimulated, and spike plus TLR7-NP in the presence of ST2825 inhibitor stimulated organoid cultures from two donors on Day 9.Extended Data Fig. 10 TLR7-NP adjuvant minimizes systemic toxicity.(a) The expression of top-10 elevated cytokines in the serum of mice (n = 3 mice per group) 3 hours and 24 hours after a single immunization of NP-OVA protein (50 μg) plus gardiquimod (20 μg) in either TLR7-Alum or TLR7-NP. Data are presented as log10 fold change of mean fluorescence intensity over naïve control mice. (b) The clinical chemistry of immunized mice at Day1, 4 and 7 post immunization (n = 2, 2, 2 mice for naïve, n = 4, 4, 4 mice for TLR7-Alum, n = 4, 4, 4 mice for TLR7-NP). Data are presented as Box and whiskers (Turkey), and analysed with two-sided, unpaired t test with Turkey’s multiple comparison.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationSupplementary InformationReporting SummarySource dataSource Data Fig. 1Statistical source data for Fig. 1b–d.Source Data Fig. 2Statistical source data for Fig. 2a–f.Source Data Fig. 3Statistical source data for Fig. 3a–g.Source Data Fig. 4Statistical source data for Fig. 4b–d,f,g.Source Data Fig. 5Statistical source data for Fig. 5b–d.Source Data Fig. 6Statistical source data for Fig. 6b,c.Source Data Extended Data Figs. 1 and 4–10Statistical source data for Extended Data Figs. 1a, 4b, 5a, 6a,b, 7, 8a,b, 9c and 10a,b.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleYin, Q., Luo, W., Mallajosyula, V. et al. A TLR7-nanoparticle adjuvant promotes a broad immune response against heterologous strains of influenza and SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Mater. 22, 380–390 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01464-2Download citationReceived: 24 September 2021Accepted: 12 December 2022Published: 30 January 2023Issue Date: March 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-022-01464-2Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Decreased TLR7 expression was associated with airway eosinophilic inflammation and lung function in asthma: evidence from machine learning approaches and experimental validation Kemin YanYuxia Liang European Journal of Medical Research (2024) Immunostimulatory nanoparticles go viral Jorge Huete-CarrascoEd C. Lavelle Nature Materials (2023) Download PDF Associated content Immunostimulatory nanoparticles go viral Jorge Huete-CarrascoEd C. Lavelle Nature Materials News & Views 02 Mar 2023 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Our publishing models Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Web Feeds Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Materials (Nat. Mater.) ISSN 1476-4660 (online) ISSN 1476-1122 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchControlling the surge of avian influenza cases in Central and South America - WOAH - World Organisation for Animal Health Direct access to content Direct access to research Direct access to menu Menu Search enfres Codes and Manuals Publications Documentary Portal Training Platform ANIMUSE PVSIS Bookshop Cart My account enfres Animal Diseases Avian Influenza Antimicrobial resistance Search Who we areToggle submenu Back to menuWho we areWe are the global authority on animal health. Founded in 1924 as the Office International des Epizooties (OIE), in May 2003 we adopted the common name World Organisation for Animal Health. An intergovernmental organisation, we focus on transparently disseminating information on animal diseases, improving animal health globally and thus build a safer, healthier and more sustainable world Mission Advocacy Strategy Structure Members Collaborate with us What we doToggle submenu Back to menuWhat we doWe work to improve animal health and welfare across the globe. By collecting, analysing and disseminating veterinary scientific information, we encourage international solidarity in the control of animal health risks. Furthermore, we work across borders to foster a One Health approach, recognising that the health of animals, humans and the environment are interdependent. Animal Health and WelfareToggle submenu Back to menu Animal Diseases Disease Data Collection Animal Welfare Wildlife Health Official Disease Status StandardsToggle submenu Back to menu Codes and Manuals Standard-Setting Process Observatory Global InitiativesToggle submenu Back to menu Disease Eradication Antimicrobial resistance One Health Biological threat reduction Food Safety Publications What we offerToggle submenu Back to menuWhat we offerWe oversee various programmes, both cross-sectoral ones and those focused on specific needs, to improve the capacities of Veterinary Services and Aquatic Animal Health Services. These programmes are designed to empower and guide countries in the development and implementation of sustainable national plans which go well beyond purely veterinary matters. Improving Veterinary ServicesToggle submenu Back to menu PVS Pathway Vaccine banks Expertise Network Safe Trade and Movement of Animals Self-declared Disease Status Veterinary products Emergency Preparedness Our 100th AnniversaryToggle submenu Back to menuOur 100th AnniversaryCelebrating 100 years of WOAH’s unwavering commitment to global animal health—a legacy of collaboration, innovation, and progress. Join us in honouring WOAH’s past, embracing the present, and charting a sustainable future. WOAH turns 100: A century of improving animal health and welfare Anniversary Reflections Share your anniversary wish Wall of anniversary wishes A century strong: our history Stories and Moments MediaToggle submenu Back to menuMediaFind information related to the animal disease situation in the world, as well to the work of the Organisation. News Events WAHIS Use the search engine below to find a specific content. Search Inicio » News » Controlling the surge of avian influenza cases in Central and South America Press Release Controlling the surge of avian influenza cases in Central and South America Published on 1 February 2023 Share: The page link has been copied to your clipboard View more For the first time since 2002, seventy-five outbreaks of high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) have been reported in nine countries in Central and South America. According to information shared by countries with the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), these outbreaks have already led to the loss of nearly 1.2 million poultry. Over the past years, avian influenza has proven to be devastating for poultry flocks and wildlife in Africa, Asia, Europe, North America. The disease is a global threat to animal health, food security and livelihoods. Affecting primarily both domestic and wild birds, it can occasionally transmit to humans and other mammals. A highly contagious disease, avian influenza is caused by viruses, whose genetic characteristics can rapidly evolve. Numerous subtypes of HPAI viruses have circulated in diverse domestic and wild bird populations on a wide geographical scale during the past several years. Recently, the disease has also encroached on several new countries in Central and South America. Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela have detected the presence of HPAI for the first time. Chile, which had been free of HPAI for 20 years, has also reported new cases of the disease. In addition, the speed of HPAI spread has been raising some concerns, reaching all these countries in only four months. While most cases have been reported in poultry, wild species have also been impacted by this disease, including the Peruvian pelican (Pelecanus thagus) and the brown pelican (Pelecanus occidentalis), among others. As one of the most consumed animal proteins in the region, poultry plays a significant role in food supply and nutrition. In 2021, according to the Mexican Poultry Producers Association, Brazil, Peru and Argentina chicken consumption ranked first, third and fifth respectively worldwide. The poultry production sector is the fastest-growing agricultural sub-sector, providing incomes for thousands of families. When disease outbreaks occur, an effective control strategy usually involves the culling of all birds in the affected and at-risk farms to curb the spread of the disease. While based on scientific recommendations, such strategy causes inevitable economic losses for farmers and has a long-lasting impact on their livelihoods. Preventing avian influenza incursion is therefore key to sustaining the poultry industry and trade. In response to the recent cases in the region, WOAH and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) created a Standing Group of Experts on Avian Influenza within the context of their joint initiative, the Global Framework for the Progressive Control of Transboundary Animal Diseases (GF-TADs). This group aims to provide guidance on preventive actions, preparedness and emergency response to as avian influenza in the region. Their first meeting took place on 13 December 2022 where together they agreed on a list of recommendations. When the first confirmed case in South America occurred, we informed key stakeholders from the poultry sector to take appropriate action in order to minimise the impacts of the disease.Dr Eva Luz Martínez Bermúdez, WOAH Delegate for Peru These recommendations reassert the need for key stakeholders to implement strict biosecurity measures along the poultry value chain to prevent further outbreaks. They notably highlight the importance of keeping away infected birds from healthy ones and cleaning and disinfecting poultry facilities. In addition, the recommendations also focus on wild birds, including the need for surveillance programmes and enhanced biosecurity measures to avoid direct or indirect contact between domestic and wild birds and thus, the potential further spread of the disease. This is essential in preventing outbreaks in bird populations and the introduction of the virus into new poultry flocks. It is critical that Members notify the World Organisation for Animal Health of outbreaks in a timely manner to ensure we can accurately monitor the evolution and spread of this transboundary animal disease.Dr Luis Barcos, WOAH Regional Representative for the Americas In light of these events, WOAH calls on countries in the region to coordinate and intensify their surveillance and preventive efforts. WOAH Reference Laboratories specialised in avian influenza can support national laboratories in the diagnostic of their samples, as needed by countries who are encouraged to share any relevant information pertaining to their disease situation in order to stop its spread and ensure a healthier world for all. For more information: WOAH web portal on avian influenza WOAH web portal on avian influenza First meeting of the Standing Group of Experts on Avian Influenza for the Americas First meeting of the Standing Group of Experts on Avian Influenza for the Americas Avian influenza and wildlife: Risk management for people working with wild birds Avian influenza and wildlife: Risk management for people working with wild birds OFFLU network OFFLU network Our latest news Press Release Superbugs could jeopardise food security for over two billion people and increase annual health care costs by US$ 159 billion annually by 2050, finds most extensive modelling to date Published on 26/09/2024 Press Release First detection of Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) in Greece and Romania Published on 14/08/2024 Press Release Dr Emmanuelle Soubeyran takes up position as new WOAH Director General Highlight Published on 01/08/2024 Press Release Dr Emmanuelle Soubeyran elected as new Director General of the World Organisation for Animal Health Published on 28/05/2024 Newsletter The monthly newsletter that relays news from the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), as well as from its network and regions. News includes its Members’ self-declarations, articles, upcoming events, publications, communication tools and more. Subscribe to the monthly newsletter and stay informed on the organisation’s latest activities at both global and regional levels. Subscribe Regions Africa Americas Asia and the pacific Europe Middle East WOAH Contact Career Procurement Follow us facebook twitter linkedin instagram youtube flickr Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright ©WOAH2024 We use cookies on our website to give you the most relevant experience by remembering your preferences and repeat visits. By clicking “Accept”, you consent to the use of ALL the cookies. However you may visit Cookie Settings to provide a controlled consent. Cookies settings Accept all Reject allCookies policy Close Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. Necessary Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. These cookies ensure basic functionalities and security features of the website, anonymously. CookieDurationDescription__cfduid1 monthThe cookie is used by cdn services like CloudFare to identify individual clients behind a shared IP address and apply security settings on a per-client basis. It does not correspond to any user ID in the web application and does not store any personally identifiable information.viewed_cookie_policy1 yearThe cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. Others others Other uncategorized cookies are those that are being analyzed and have not been classified into a category as yet. CookieDurationDescription_gat_UA-190436238-11 minuteNo description_gat_UA-27210936-11 minuteNo description_pk_id.2.ece21 year 27 daysNo description_pk_ses.2.ece230 minutesNo description_pk_testcookie.2.ece2sessionNo descriptionCONSENT16 years 8 months 2 days 15 hoursNo descriptionoKBJgxZFRjc-1 dayNo descriptionXxhSHVdnPFQD1 dayNo description Advertisement advertisement Advertisement cookies are used to provide visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns. These cookies track visitors across websites and collect information to provide customized ads. CookieDurationDescriptionIDE1 year 24 daysUsed by Google DoubleClick and stores information about how the user uses the website and any other advertisement before visiting the website. This is used to present users with ads that are relevant to them according to the user profile.test_cookie15 minutesThis cookie is set by doubleclick.net. The purpose of the cookie is to determine if the user's browser supports cookies.VISITOR_INFO1_LIVE5 months 27 daysThis cookie is set by Youtube. Used to track the information of the embedded YouTube videos on a website. Analytics analytics Analytical cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help provide information on metrics the number of visitors, bounce rate, traffic source, etc. CookieDurationDescription_gasessionThis cookie is installed by Google Analytics. The cookie is used to calculate visitor, session, campaign data and keep track of site usage for the site's analytics report. The cookies store information anonymously and assign a randomly generated number to identify unique visitors._gid1 dayThis cookie is installed by Google Analytics. The cookie is used to store information of how visitors use a website and helps in creating an analytics report of how the website is doing. The data collected including the number visitors, the source where they have come from, and the pages visted in an anonymous form. Functional functional Functional cookies help to perform certain functionalities like sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedbacks, and other third-party features. CookieDurationDescription__cf_bm30 minutesThis cookie is set by CloudFare. The cookie is used to support Cloudfare Bot Management.langThis cookie is used to store the language preferences of a user to serve up content in that stored language the next time user visit the website.pll_language1 yearThis cookie is set by Polylang plugin for WordPress powered websites. The cookie stores the language code of the last browsed page. Performance performance Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indexes of the website which helps in delivering a better user experience for the visitors. CookieDurationDescriptionYSCsessionThis cookies is set by Youtube and is used to track the views of embedded videos. Save & AcceptBird flu 'spills over' to otters and foxes in UKSkip to contentBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveHomeNewsIsrael-Gaza WarWar in UkraineUS & CanadaUKUK PoliticsEnglandN. IrelandN. Ireland PoliticsScotlandScotland PoliticsWalesWales PoliticsAfricaAsiaChinaIndiaAustraliaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastIn PicturesBBC InDepthBBC VerifyUS ElectionFull resultsKamala HarrisDonald TrumpJD VanceTim WalzSportBusinessExecutive LoungeTechnology of BusinessFuture of BusinessInnovationTechnologyScience & HealthArtificial IntelligenceAI v the MindCultureFilm & TVMusicArt & DesignStyleBooksEntertainment NewsArtsArts in MotionTravelDestinationsAfricaAntarcticaAsiaAustralia and PacificCaribbean & BermudaCentral AmericaEuropeMiddle EastNorth AmericaSouth AmericaWorld’s TableCulture & ExperiencesAdventuresThe SpeciaListEarthNatural WondersWeather & ScienceClimate SolutionsSustainable BusinessGreen LivingVideoLiveLive NewsLive SportHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherNewslettersBird flu 'spills over' to otters and foxes in UKBBC/Tim NicholsonThe virus has continued to spread in a wide range of domestic and wild bird speciesThe largest ever outbreak of bird flu is spilling over into mammals, including otters and foxes in the UK.Figures released to the BBC show the virus has led to the death of about 208 million birds around the world and at least 200 recorded cases in mammals.Public health bosses warn the mutation in mammals could see a jump to humans but the risk to the public is very low.There will now be more targeted surveillance and testing of animals and humans exposed to the virus in the UK.The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) still advises that avian flu is primarily a disease of birds, but experts across the globe are looking at the risks of it spilling over into other species.Worldwide, the virus has been found in a range of mammals, including grizzly bears in America and mink in Spain, as well as in dolphin and seals.In the UK, the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA) has tested 66 mammals, including seals, and found nine otters and foxes were positive for highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1. Cases have been found in Durham, Cheshire and Cornwall in England; Powys in Wales; Shetland, the Inner Hebrides and Fife, Scotland.It is believed they had fed on dead or sick wild birds infected with the virus. The animals were found to have a mutation of the virus that could make it easier to infect mammals, but there was no evidence of transmission between mammals. The APHA added that there was "a very low likelihood of any widespread infection in GB mammals".Why is bird flu so bad this year?Anti-Bird flu measures in place across Great BritainProf Ian Brown, APHA's director of scientific services, said: "A sick or a dead wild bird contains an awful lot of virus. So scavenging mammals that will be opportunistic and predate on dead or sick birds will be exposed to very large quantities of virus. That gives a possibility for the virus to enter a host population that it doesn't normally maintain in."Prof Brown said that the UK's national avian flu taskforce was now ramping up its surveillance of cases in mammals and genome analysis of the virus itself while keeping a close eye on its spread in global populations of wild birds."The virus is absolutely on the march. And it's almost remarkable - it's a single strain," he said, adding that greater international action to tackle its spread was needed.He told the BBC he was "acutely aware of the risks" of avian flu becoming a pandemic like Covid-19.He said: "This global spread is a concern. We do need globally to look at new strategies, those international partnerships, to get on top of this disease."If we don't solve the problem across the globe, we're going to continue to have that risk."APHAProf Ian Brown says there needs to be closer international co-operationSince October 2021, when the latest outbreak began, there have been five confirmed human cases of the H5N1 virus, including one in the UK, and one death, in China. Last month, a nine-year old girl in Ecuador was found to be infected with avian influenza A(H5). The World Health Organization (WHO) said that, in the past 20 years, there have been almost 870 cases of human infection with the avian influenza H5N1 virus reported from 21 countries. Of these, 457 were fatal.It said the virus has "not acquired the ability for sustained transmission among humans. Thus the likelihood of human-to-human spread is low."But it added: "Due to the constantly evolving nature of influenza viruses, WHO continues to stress the importance of global surveillance to detect and monitor virological, epidemiological, and clinical changes associated with emerging or circulating influenza viruses that may affect human (or animal) health, and timely virus-sharing for risk assessment."Dr Wenqing Zhang, the head of WHO's global influenza programme, said of the threat posed by the virus spilling over: "It is very concerning and the risk has been increasing over the years as reflected in the number of outbreaks in animals as well as a number of infections in humans."Intergovernmental organisation the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) told the BBC it has recorded almost 42 million individual cases in domestic and wild birds since the outbreak began in October 2021.Almost 15 million domestic birds, including poultry, have died from the disease, and more than 193 million more have been culled.It also shows 119 outbreaks affecting mammals, with about 200 individual cases recorded - although a WOAH spokesperson warned the spread to mammals was likely to be under-reported.Dr Gregorio Torres, WOAH's head of science, said there had been an increase in reports of non-avian species being affected by the virus over the past 18 months.He said it "could be a signal of very sensitive surveillance - an indicator that we are doing a good job".But he added: "On the other hand, it could also be an indicator that there is a change in the epidemiology of the disease or a change in the dynamic of the disease. And that will require close monitoring. "There is a risk for further transmission between species and we cannot underestimate the potential adaptation to humans."In a recent report, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) warned that the "rapid and consistent acquisition of the mutation in mammals may imply this virus has a propensity to cause zoonotic infections", meaning it could jump to humans.The agency also raised concerns about limited wild bird and mammal surveillance and genomic data collection in England, and warned that there was not enough testing of people who had been contact with infected birds.It is now looking to develop new ways of testing humans who have been exposed to the disease but may be asymptomaticDr Meera Chand, incident director for avian influenza at UKHSA, said: "Latest evidence suggests that the avian influenza viruses currently circulating in birds do not spread easily to people. We remain vigilant for any evidence of changing risk."There have recently been some detections of avian influenza viruses in a small number of mammals in the UK. However, the risk assessment conducted by UKHSA and partners did not identify any signals of increased risk to the general public from avian influenza at present." Meanwhile, the public is being warned not to touch any dead or sick birds, but to report any dead birds of prey, three or more dead wild waterfowl or gulls or five or more dead birds of any species that they find to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.Bird flu found in two dead swansBird flu outbreak prompts protection zoneBird centre would close if exposed to avian fluWhat is bird flu and what's behind the outbreak?UK virus research site left to deteriorate - MPsUK taskforce set up to tackle bird flu spreadPublic healthRelatedPHA boss accepts failings at UK Covid Inquiry 6 days agoNorthern IrelandWhat is the infected blood scandal?30 Oct 2024HealthTwo top Isle of Man public health vacancies filled29 Oct 2024Isle of ManBritish Broadcasting CorporationHomeNewsUS ElectionSportBusinessInnovationCultureArtsTravelEarthVideoLiveAudioWeatherBBC ShopBBC in other languagesFollow BBC on:Terms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpContact the BBCAdvertise with usDo not share or sell my infoContact technical supportCopyright 2024 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Bird flu keeps spreading beyond birds. Scientists worry it signals a growing threat to humans, too | CBC News ContentSkip to Main ContentAccessibility HelphamburgerMenuWhen search suggestions are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.SearchSearchSign InQuick LinksNewsSportsRadioMusicListen LiveTVWatchnewsTop StoriesLocalClimateWorldCanadaPoliticsIndigenousBusinessThe NationalHealthEntertainmentScienceCBC News InvestigatesGo PublicAbout CBC NewsBeing Black in CanadaMore Bird flu keeps spreading beyond birds. Scientists worry it signals a growing threat to humans, too | CBC News LoadedHealthBird flu keeps spreading beyond birds. Scientists worry it signals a growing threat to humans, tooAs a deadly form of avian influenza keeps ravaging bird populations around much of the world, scientists are also tracking infections among other animals — including various types of mammals more closely related to humans.Outbreak on mink farm in Spain could be first real-world case of mammal-to-mammal transmission, study suggestsLauren Pelley · CBC News · Posted: Feb 02, 2023 4:00 AM EST | Last Updated: February 2, 2023A deadly avian influenza outbreak on a mink farm in Spain could be first real-world case of mammal-to-mammal transmission, a new study suggests, as scientists warn this virus could pose a growing threat to humans as well. (Sergei Grits/The Associated Press)Social SharingAs a deadly form of avian influenza continues ravaging bird populations around much of the world, scientists are tracking infections among other animals — including various types of mammals more closely related to humans.Throughout the last year, Canadian and U.S. officials detected highly pathogenic H5N1 avian flu in a range of species, from bears to foxes. In January, France's national reference laboratory announced that a cat suffered severe neurological symptoms from an infection in late 2022, with the virus showing genetic characteristics of adaptation to mammals. Most concerning, multiple researchers said, was a large, recent outbreak on a Spanish mink farm.Last October, farm workers began noticing a spike in deaths among the animals, with sick minks experiencing an array of dire symptoms like loss of appetite, excessive saliva, bloody snouts, tremors, and a lack of muscle control.The culprit wound up being H5N1, marking the first known instance of this kind of avian influenza infection among farmed minks in Europe, notes a study published in Eurosurveillance this month."Our findings also indicate that an onward transmission of the virus to other minks may have taken place in the affected farm," the researchers wrote.Eventually, the entire population of minks was either killed or culled — more than 50,000 animals in total.That's a major shift, after only sporadic cases among humans and other mammals over the last decade, according to Michelle Wille, a researcher at the University of Sydney who focuses on the dynamics of wild bird viruses. "This outbreak signals the very real potential for the emergence of mammal-to-mammal transmission," she said in email correspondence with CBC News. Second OpinionHow deadly bird flu sparked explosive outbreaks in 2022 — and why it matters for global healthB.C. warns doctors to watch for avian flu spreading to humans after spike in cases in birdsIt's only one farm, and notably, none of the workers — who all wore face shields, masks, and disposable overalls — got infected.But the concern now, said Toronto-based infectious disease specialist Dr. Isaac Bogoch, is if this virus mutates in a way that allows it to become increasingly transmissible between mammals, including humans, "it could have deadly consequences." "This is an infection that has epidemic and pandemic potential," he said. "I don't know if people recognize how big a deal this is."WATCH | Explosive avian flu hits global bird populations:'Explosive' avian flu surge hits global bird populations2 years agoDuration 2:02Global bird populations are being ravaged by a deadly strain of avian flu, wiping out flocks of domestic poultry and killing wild birds. Some researchers warn the virus could eventually evolve to better infect humans and potentially start a future pandemic.H5N1 has high mortality rateAmong birds, the mortality rate of this strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza can be close to 100 per cent, causing devastation to both wild bird populations and poultry farms.It's also often deadly for other mammals, humans included.The World Health Organization (WHO) has documented 240 cases of H5N1 avian influenza within four Western Pacific countries — including China, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam — over the last two decades. More than half of the infected individuals died. Global WHO figures show more than 870 human cases were reported from 2003 to 2022, along with at least 450 deaths — a fatality rate of more than 50 per cent. Bogoch said the reported death toll may be an overestimate, since not all infections may be detected, though it's clear people can "get very, very sick from these infections."Current strain of avian flu spreading on a 'completely different' scale, B.C.'s chief vet saysNearly 100 birds at popular B.C. tourist ranch euthanized after avian flu detectedMost human infections also appeared to involve people having direct contact with infected birds. Real-world mink-to-mink transmission now firmly suggests H5N1 is now "poised to emerge in mammals," Wille said — and while the outbreak in Spain may be the first reported instance of mammalian spread, it may not be the last. "A virus which has evolved on a mink farm and subsequently infects farm workers exposed to infected animals is a highly plausible route for the emergence of a virus capable of human-to-human transmission to emerge," she warned. Louise Moncla, an assistant professor of pathobiology at the University of Pennsylvania school of veterinary medicine, explained that having an "intermediary host" is a common mechanism through which viruses adapt to new host species. "And so what's concerning about this is that this is exactly the kind of scenario you would expect to see that could lead to this type of adaptation, that could allow these viruses to replicate better in other mammals — like us."Government workers wear protective gear to collect poultry for slaughter during an outbreak of avian influenza on the Ivory Coast. More than 70 countries reported cases in 2022, according to the World Organisation for Animal Health. (Legnan Koula/EPA-EFE)Surveillance, vaccines both neededWhat's more reassuring is the ongoing development of influenza vaccines, giving humanity a head start on the well-known threat posed by bird flu.Wille noted the earlier spread of H7N9, another avian influenza strain which caused hundreds of human cases in the early 2010s, prompted similar concern that the virus would acquire the mutations needed for ongoing human-to-human transmission. "However, a very aggressive and successful poultry vaccination campaign ultimately stopped all human cases," she added.Chicken farmers brace for more cases of avian influenza as wild birds migrateHundreds of dead gulls found as 'unprecedented' avian flu outbreak continues in Nova ScotiaBut while several H5N1 avian influenza vaccines have been produced, including one manufactured in Canada, there's no option approved for public use in this country. To ward off the potential threat this strain poses to human health, Bogoch said ongoing surveillance and vaccine production needs to remain top-of-mind for both policy makers and vaccine manufacturers.Dr. Jan Hajek, an infectious diseases physician at Vancouver General Hospital, also questioned whether it's time to wind down global mink farming, given the spread of various viruses, from avian influenza to SARS-CoV-2, the virus behind COVID-19."We're closely related to minks and ferrets, in terms of influenza risks … if it's propagating to minks, and killing minks, it's worrisome to us," he said. Avian flu is devastating N.L.'s birds. This biologist has some ideas on how to curb itP.E.I. hopes the worst of avian flu has passed as cases declineIn 2021, B.C. officials announced an end to mink farming across the province, saying the farms can be reservoirs for viruses and represent an ongoing danger to public health. All mink farm operations must be shut down, with all of the pelts sold, by April 2025.However, other provinces — and plenty of countries — do intend to keep their mink farms operating. "Is it responsible to have these kinds of farming conditions where these types of events can occur?" questioned Moncla. "If we're going to keep having these types of farms, what can we do to make this safer?"ABOUT THE AUTHORLauren PelleySenior Health & Medical ReporterLauren Pelley covers the global spread of infectious diseases, pandemic preparedness and the crucial intersection between health and climate change. She's a two-time RNAO Media Award winner for in-depth health reporting in 2020 and 2022, a silver medallist for best editorial newsletter at the 2024 Digital Publishing Awards, and a 2024 Covering Climate Now award winner in the health category. Contact her at: lauren.pelley@cbc.ca.@LaurenPelleyCBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices|About CBC NewsCorrections and clarifications|Submit a news tip|Report errorAdd some “good” to your morning and evening.A vital dose of the week's news in health and medicine, from CBC Health. Delivered to your inbox every Saturday morning.Email address:SubscribeCurrent TimeIgnore this field. If any data is entered for this field, you will not be subscribed to this newsletter....The next issue of CBC Health's Second Opinion will soon be in your inbox.Discover all CBC newsletters in the Subscription Centre.This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Google Terms of Service apply.Footer LinksMy AccountProfileCBC GemNewslettersAbout CBC AccountsConnect with CBCFacebookXYouTubeInstagramMobileRSSPodcastsContact CBCSubmit FeedbackHelp CentreAudience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636About CBCCorporate InfoSitemapReuse & PermissionTerms of UsePrivacyPrivacy PreferencesJobsOur UnionsIndependent ProducersPolitical Ads RegistryAdChoicesServicesOmbudsmanCorrections and ClarificationsPublic AppearancesCommercial ServicesCBC ShopDoing Business with UsRenting FacilitiesRadio Canada InternationalCBC LiteAccessibilityIt is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.About CBC AccessibilityAccessibility Feedback©2024 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.canow8 Illnesses That Cause Flu-Like Symptoms ​ Skip to content Health Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletters Search Please fill out this field. News Conditions A - Z Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products Read More Stay informed with emails from us Search the site GO Please fill out this field. Newsletter Sign Up News Conditions A - Z Anxiety Coronavirus Type 2 Diabetes Headaches and Migraines Heart Disease View All Nutrition Eat Well Nutrition Basics Vitamins and Supplements View All Wellness Mental Health Fitness Skincare Sexual Health View All What to Buy Nutrition & Supplements Oral & Dental Care Sleep Products Over the Counter Skincare View All About Us Editorial Process Medical Expert Board Diversity Pledge Testing and Vetting Products Health Conditions A-Z Infectious Diseases Flu 8 Illnesses That Cause Flu-Like Symptoms That Aren’t the Flu Other bugs can also cause those flu-like symptoms. By Amanda Gardner Amanda Gardner Amanda Gardner is a freelance health reporter whose stories have appeared in cnn.com, health.com, cnn.com, WebMD, HealthDay, Self Magazine, the New York Daily News, Teachers & Writers Magazine, the Foreign Service Journal, AmeriQuests (Vanderbilt University), and others. health's editorial guidelines and Maggie O'Neill Maggie O'Neill Maggie O’Neill is a health writer and reporter based in New York who specializes in covering medical research and emerging wellness trends, with a focus on cancer and addiction. Prior to her time at Health, her work appeared in the Observer, Good Housekeeping, CNN, and Vice. She was a fellow of the Association of Health Care Journalists’ 2020 class on Women’s Health Journalism and 2021 class on Cancer Reporting. In her spare time, she likes meditating, watching TikToks, and playing fetch with her dog, Finnegan. health's editorial guidelines Updated on February 1, 2023 Medically reviewed by Daniel More, MD Medically reviewed by Daniel More, MD Daniel More, MD, FAAAAI, FACAAI, FACP, is a board-certified allergist and former clinical immunologist at Allergy Partners of the Central California Coast. learn more There are here are many illnesses that bring about flu-like symptoms, like fever, cough, runny nose, and headaches.Most of these infections tend to go away on their own.Be on alert for signs of trouble such as shortness of breath, chest or abdominal pain, dizziness, or dehydration. If you experience any of these in addition to your flu-like symptoms, call a healthcare provider or go to an emergency room. Considering that the flu can be highly contagious, it's tempting to worry that every cough, muscle ache, and hint of a fever is a sign you caught the flu. That's understandable, given that there are a ton of other illnesses that bring on copycat flu-like symptoms, like fever, cough, runny nose, and headaches, among others. "Any overwhelming infection that stimulates our immune system can [produce] some of the same symptoms," Cindy Weston, DNP, RN, FNP-BC, an associate professor at the Texas A&M School of Nursing in Bryan, Texas, told Health. In other words, "most flu just feels like a regular cold," Joseph Khabbaza, MD, a pulmonologist with the Cleveland Clinic in Independence, Ohio, told Health. Additionally, flu vaccines help reduce the severity of symptoms in those who are vaccinated. The only way to know for sure you have the flu is to get tested. But sometimes, there are subtle clues to help you distinguish between the flu and something else. Getting tested can also help distinguish between the flu and COVID-19. Here's what you need to know about a few of the many conditions that can cause flu-like symptoms but aren't the flu. What Is Flu (Influenza)? Colds Both colds and influenza are viral illnesses, they both tend to occur in the same seasons, and they have many overlapping symptoms, like a sore throat and a stuffy nose. The main difference is how quickly the symptoms come on. "A cold typically gradually progresses symptom by symptom over [several] days," Keri Peterson, MD, an internist based in New York, told Health. "With the flu, the constellation of symptoms of high fever, cough, muscle ache, and severe lethargy comes on in 24 to 48 hours." And even though so many symptoms overlap, colds typically don't come with chest pain or body aches, which are more characteristic of the flu, added Dr. Peterson. 8 Signs It's More Serious Than the Common Cold Strep Throat The flu and strep throat share many symptoms, but there are two you may find in the flu but never in strep: Cough and nasal congestion. Strep throat may also bring swollen lymph nodes (bean-shaped structures that are part of the immune system), swollen tonsils (soft tissue masses at the back of the throat), tiny red spots on the roof of the mouth, or white blotches on the tonsils known as exudates. None of those symptoms are typical of the flu. If a healthcare provider suspects strep, they will probably swab your throat and test for the bacteria. If the test comes back positive, you'll likely get antibiotics, which can usually clear up the symptoms quickly. 7 Signs You Could Have Strep Throat Pneumonia Pneumonia can come separately from the flu, or it can be a secondary complication of getting sick. You may even look like you're over the flu and become stricken with another infection. "People are getting the flu and maybe even riding it out, and a week or so later, they're coming in with pneumonia," noted Weston. Pneumonia that comes with or after the flu can be caused by the flu virus itself or by co-infections of the flu virus and bacteria. Bacterial pneumonia is very serious and can be treated with antibiotics. With that type of pneumonia, "the cough is pretty persistent and unrelenting and often associated with chest pain," explained Weston. "The fever could be low grade or higher. A lot of times there's no appetite with pneumonia, and there can be some body aches." A pneumonia cough also has mucus in it. Viral pneumonia is typically milder than the bacterial kind. You may also have some congestion, coughing, and fatigue. Healthcare providers can listen for telltale signs of pneumonia by putting a stethoscope on your chest, said Dr. Peterson. Signs of Pneumonia—8 Symptoms You Shouldn't Ignore Mononucleosis Mononucleosis, also called the "kissing disease," or just mono, passes through saliva (along with coughing, sneezing, and sharing utensils). Mono is usually caused by the Epstein-Barr virus and tends to hit adolescents and young adults more than other age groups. Symptoms often come on slowly, but they can mimic the flu. You might feel really, really tired, spike a fever, or have a sore throat and body aches. But other symptoms can help differentiate mono from the flu, including a swollen liver or spleen. Mono also drags on longer than the flu, often lasting two to four weeks, but sometimes even months longer. Meningitis Meningitis is inflammation of the membranes (meninges) that cover the brain and spinal cord. Like pneumonia, meningitis can be caused by a viral or bacterial infection. Viral meningitis is more common and milder, but the symptoms of both are similar and look a lot like the flu: headache, fever, and fatigue. Meningitis also comes with a stiff neck and sensitivity to bright light. Viral meningitis is like colds and the flu in that most people recover on their own in a week or so. Bacterial meningitis, however, can cause brain damage and even death if it's not treated promptly with antibiotics. What You Need to Know About Meningitis Bronchitis Acute bronchitis not only has cold- and flu-like symptoms, but it's also even caused by many of the same viruses. "Bronchitis has a lot of overlap–productive cough with mucus, lethargy, and a sore throat," explained Dr. Peterson. The main difference is that bronchitis doesn't come with a high fever. Bronchitis symptoms also tend to center on your chest and throat instead of the full-body aches common with the flu, added Dr. Peterson. The nagging cough of an acute bout of bronchitis can last up to three weeks, which is longer than a cough from the flu. There's no test for bronchitis like there is for the flu, so healthcare providers usually diagnose it by asking about symptoms and examining you. Bronchitis treatment consists of rest, drinking lots of fluids, and taking meds that can relieve symptoms. 8 Reasons Why You May Be Coughing So Much Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) has symptoms that can also be mistaken for the flu (or a cold). "It can cause runny nose and cough," Afif El-Hasan, MD, a pediatrician with Kaiser Permanente in Orange County, Calif, told Health. Unlike the flu, though, RSV symptoms usually appear gradually. They typically go away on their own, as well. You just need to drink plenty of fluids and rest. Similar symptoms come from infection with what are called human parainfluenza viruses. "They are like the flu, but they're not as bad," noted Dr. El-Hasan. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) About two to four weeks after becoming infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), most people experience flu-like symptoms. Those symptoms may include fever, chills, rashes, night sweats, or muscle aches. They may last for a few days or linger for several weeks. Although there are many other reasons that you may have flu-like symptoms, if you think that you may have been exposed to HIV, it's important to get tested. The CDC also recommends that all individuals between the ages of 13 and 64 get tested for HIV at some point. When Should You Contact A Healthcare Provider? "If you suspect you have the flu, then you should see [a healthcare provider] within 48 hours because [antiviral] medicine has to be taken very quickly," said Dr. Peterson. "Err on the side of caution." Dr. Khabbaza added that if you're unable to go about your normal routine, you should consider heading to a healthcare provider. Also, if certain symptoms get worse, that could be an indication of the flu or another serious condition, not just a chest cold, and you, again, should consider getting checked out as soon as possible. For example, if your body aches progress "to the point you can barely move around," or if your symptoms are causing difficulty breathing, it's definitely time to head to a healthcare provider, said Dr. Khabbaza. Shortness of breath or chest pain, in particular, can indicate many medical emergencies, such as a pulmonary embolism (a blood clot that blocks an artery supplying blood flow to the lungs), that require prompt treatment. Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! Tell us why! Other Submit 13 Sources Health.com uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our editorial process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Flu symptoms & diagnosis. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Diagnosing flu. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Similarities and differences between flu and COVID-19​. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Flu symptoms & complications. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Strep throat: all you need to know. American Lung Association. What causes pneumonia? Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. About infectious mononucleosis. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Meningitis. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Bacterial meningitis. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Bronchitis. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. Human parainfluenza viruses (HPIVs) - Symptoms and Illnesses. Centers for Disease Control & Prevention. HIV basics. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Getting Tested. Related Articles When Is Flu Season? Top Months What Are the Symptoms of Influenza (Flu) B? What To Know About Influenza A What Are the Long-Term Health Effects of the Flu? When Is a Good Time To Get a Flu Shot? Signs and Symptoms of Influenza (Flu) What To Know About Influenza (Flu) What Is the Flu Incubation Period? How Many People Die From the Flu Each Year? How Long Does the Flu Last? What Is the Difference Between Flu A and Flu B? How Contagious Is the Flu? What To Know About Influenza B (Flu) What To Know About Flu Tests—When You Need One, and What To Do if You Test Positive 10 Types of Food To Eat When You Have the Flu—and What To Avoid COVID-19 vs. the Flu: Which Is Worse? Health Newsletters Follow Us News Conditions A-Z Nutrition Wellness About Us Medical Expert Board Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy Product Vetting Terms of Service Careers Advertise Contact Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family. Newsletter Sign Up Newsletter Sign UpStudy finds mask wearing likely makes 'little or no difference' regarding flu transmissionPlease ensure Javascript is enabled for purposes of website accessibilityMon, 11 Nov 2024 23:11:43 GMT (1731366703559)Story Infinite Scroll - News3 v1.0.0 (common)c176e2edee36242d1f910bbcf0b370e84d231d3fNewsWeatherRadarMapsHurricane CenterWeather CamsWeather FactsHurricane TrackerHurricane PreparednessCommunityFeaturesGame CenterWatch Now 71 Tue 73 Wed 76Study finds mask wearing likely makes 'little or no difference' regarding flu transmissionby ALEC SCHEMMEL | The National DeskWed, February 1st 2023 at 12:27 PMUpdated Thu, February 2nd 2023 at 7:11 PMTravel suitcase or luggage, passport, air ticket and facial mask. New Rules for Traveling during the pandemic of coronavirus or covid-19. Medical face mask wearing obligatory in airport and airplane flights to Europe, Asia, America. Passport, ticket and suitcase ready for holidays.TOPICS:AT&T INC.AustraliaCABLE NEWS NETWORK, INC.California,United StatesCanadaSaudi ArabiaUnited KingdomArticlesUNITED KINGDOM (TND) — Research from a group of international doctors analyzed nearly 80 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and found that "physical interventions" to prevent respiratory transmission, such as masks, likely made "little or no difference."After analyzing these RCTs, the group of researchers also found wearing specialized N95 masks or respirators, compared to wearing typical surgical masks, "probably makes little to no difference" in relation to flu transmission.We identified 78 relevant studies," the research said. "They took place in low, middle, and high-income countries worldwide: in hospitals, schools, homes, offices, childcare centres, and communities during nonepidemic influenza periods, the global H1N1 influenza pandemic in 2009, epidemic influenza seasons up to 2016, and during the COVID19 pandemic."Our confidence in these results is generally low to moderate for the subjective outcomes related to respiratory illness, but moderate for the more precisely defined laboratory-confirmed respiratory virus infection, related to masks and N95/P2 respirators," the research continued "The results might change when further evidence becomes available."The study was conducted by the peer-reviewed Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, which is run by Cochrane, an international, independent network of researchers, professionals, patients, and others interested in health.Titled "Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses," the study was completed by several doctoral researchers from Canada, the U.K., Australia and Saudi Arabia.RCTs are considered the most scientifically rigorous methods of hypothesis testing available. But the study did concede many were "conducted during nonepidemic influenza periods."Therefore, many studies were conducted in the context of lower respiratory viral circulation and transmission compared to COVID-19," the study pointed out.However, multiple RCTs analyzed were conducted to evaluate physical interventions related to influenza transmission in concurrence with COVID-19, including some specifically looking at mask effectiveness. Additionally, several others were conducted during the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic, as well as some during what were considered epidemic influenza seasons.In addition to masks, the study also analyzed the effectiveness of hand washing as an intervention to halt viral transmission. Some results showed hand washing "may" reduce the number of people who get infected, but other results included in the overall RCT analysis could not confirm a statistically significant difference in transmission between when rigorous hand hygiene was adhered to and when it was not.The Biden administration distributed hundreds of millions of N95 masks amid the pandemic, totaling almost half a billion dollars, according to CNN.The move to supply so much personal protective equipment during the COVID pandemic made it a ripe situation for abuse.According to investigative reporting nonprofit ProPublica, an estimated $100 million in taxpayer dollars were lost to scammers who seized on the opportunity.The federal government continues to recommend masks in areas designated "high" risk, and indoor masking in "medium" risk settings. Earlier this year, state and local officials began temporarily reinstituting mask mandates and recommendations again for indoor settings, such as work and school, in states like California,New Yorkand Massachusetts.Stay ConnectedLike UsFollow Ussbg-envelopeNewsletter Sign up /sign-up© 2024 Sinclair, Inc.TermsFCCFCCPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyCookie PreferencesLoading ...