Intranasal influenza-vectored COVID-19 vaccine restrains the SARS-CoV-2 inflammatory response in hamsters | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Intranasal influenza-vectored COVID-19 vaccine restrains the SARS-CoV-2 inflammatory response in hamsters Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 11 July 2023 Intranasal influenza-vectored COVID-19 vaccine restrains the SARS-CoV-2 inflammatory response in hamsters Liang Zhang ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0002-3894-28481 na1, Yao Jiang1 na1, Jinhang He1 na1, Junyu Chen1 na1, Ruoyao Qi1 na1, Lunzhi Yuan1 na1, Tiange Shao2 na1, Hui Zhao3 na1, Congjie Chen1, Yaode Chen1, Xijing Wang1, Xing Lei1, Qingxiang Gao ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3699-60094, Chunlan Zhuang1, Ming Zhou1, Jian Ma1, Wei Liu1, Man Yang1, Rao Fu1, Yangtao Wu1, Feng Chen1, Hualong Xiong1, Meifeng Nie1, Yiyi Chen1, Kun Wu1, Mujin Fang1,5, Yingbin Wang1,5, Zizheng Zheng ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0099-42121,5, Shoujie Huang1,5, Shengxiang Ge ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7165-30041,5, Shih Chin Cheng ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1251-87744, Huachen Zhu ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2711-05016,7, Tong Cheng ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1638-62141,5, Quan Yuan ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5487-561X1,5, Ting Wu1,5, Jun Zhang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6601-91801,5, Yixin Chen ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9591-634X1,5, Tianying Zhang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2477-329X1,5, Changgui Li3, Hai Qi ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5475-39892, Yi Guan6,7 & …Ningshao Xia ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0179-52661,5 Show authors Nature Communications volume 14, Article number: 4117 (2023) Cite this article 8790 Accesses 19 Citations 15 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects InfectionLive attenuated vaccinesSARS-CoV-2Viral infection AbstractThe emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants and “anatomical escape” characteristics threaten the effectiveness of current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines. There is an urgent need to understand the immunological mechanism of broad-spectrum respiratory tract protection to guide broader vaccines development. Here we investigate immune responses induced by an NS1-deleted influenza virus vectored intranasal COVID-19 vaccine (dNS1-RBD) which provides broad-spectrum protection against SARS-CoV-2 variants in hamsters. Intranasal delivery of dNS1-RBD induces innate immunity, trained immunity and tissue-resident memory T cells covering the upper and lower respiratory tract. It restrains the inflammatory response by suppressing early phase viral load post SARS-CoV-2 challenge and attenuating pro-inflammatory cytokine (Il6, Il1b, and Ifng) levels, thereby reducing excess immune-induced tissue injury compared with the control group. By inducing local cellular immunity and trained immunity, intranasal delivery of NS1-deleted influenza virus vectored vaccine represents a broad-spectrum COVID-19 vaccine strategy to reduce disease burden. Similar content being viewed by others Intranasal vaccination with an NDV-vectored SARS-CoV-2 vaccine protects against Delta and Omicron challenges Article Open access 23 May 2024 An intranasal influenza virus-vectored vaccine prevents SARS-CoV-2 replication in respiratory tissues of mice and hamsters Article Open access 12 April 2023 Intranasal vaccination of hamsters with a Newcastle disease virus vector expressing the S1 subunit protects animals against SARS-CoV-2 disease Article Open access 20 June 2022 IntroductionThe coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a global disaster with unprecedented impact, causing serious public health hazards to human society1. SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus) invades the host by binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), a high-affinity receptor on respiratory epithelial cell surfaces. Currently, 50 vaccines have been approved for use, most of which are vaccinated by intramuscular injection. The protective effects are mainly derived from the neutralizing antibody targeting spike antigen, and large-scale vaccination has effectively reduced SARS-CoV-2 symptomatic infection, hospitalization and death2,3,4. Antibody levels in the respiratory tract are 200-500 times lower than that in circulation5, which leads to “anatomical escape” of SARS-CoV-2 in the upper respiratory tract since it is difficult to completely block the infection, especially after the peak vaccine-induced immune response period6,7,8. Furthermore, escape variants are emerging in an endless stream; for example, the Omicron mutant strain has the most significant changes in antigenicity and the immunity conferred after vaccinations and natural infection9,10. Finally, the virus is also hosted by several animal reservoirs such as minks, cats, deer’s11,12. These realities portend that COVID-19 will coexist with humans for many years and will pose a continuing threat. Therefore, the development of broad-spectrum COVID-19 vaccines that rely on various immune mechanisms and different technical routes should be encouraged.Theoretically, local protective immune factors in the respiratory tract should respond to SARS-CoV-2 infection in a timelier manner than effectors present in the peripheral lymph nodes and blood. Therefore, the development of COVID-19 vaccines via respiratory inoculation has become a hot pipeline shown positive effects in preclinical animal experiments, including vaccines based on adenovirus vectors, vesicular stomatitis virus vectors and other viral vectors13,14,15. An Ad-vectored trivalent COVID-19 vaccine expressing spike-1, nucleocapsid, and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) antigens from Afkhami et al. shows a good broad-spectrum protective effect against a variety of SARS-CoV-2 variant strains by intranasal vaccination16. In addition, trained immunity not dependent on specific antigen epitope also plays an important role in the broad-spectrum efficacy of this respiratory mucosal vaccine16. It would be difficult to achieve sterilizing immunity against SARS-CoV-2 infection by vaccination as the emerging variants and “anatomical escape” characteristics. Instead, inducing a local immune regulation mechanism that prevents an excessive inflammatory response in the respiratory tract will achieve broad-spectrum protection and reduce the COVID-19 disease burden. The broad-spectrum protective effect of NS1-impaired influenza virus on heterologous influenza virus challenge is independent of virus clearance and deserves attention17. Intranasal immunization with NS1-truncated virus (A/PR8/NS124) induces stronger effector T-cells and certain immunoregulatory mechanisms compared with wild-type H1N1 influenza strain (A/PR8/NSfull), which protects the organism against lethal heterologous A/Aichi/2/68 (H3N2) influenza virus challenge through significant attenuation of inflammation and pathology without inhibiting viral load17. These studies suggest raise a hypothesis that the vaccine-induced protective effect may be derived from immune regulation in the respiratory tract to prevent excessive inflammation, but not limited to block viral infection or suppress viral levels.Modification of NS1 protein is a promising approach for the development of live-attenuated influenza viral vectors18. We previously developed an intranasal vaccine based on the NS1-deleted H1N1 vector carrying the gene encoding SARS-CoV-2-RBD (dNS1-RBD)19,20. A randomized placebo-controlled phase III clinical trial demonstrated that the vaccine has a good safety and broad-spectrum efficacy against Omicron symptomatic infection21[ChiCTR2100051391], and was approved for emergency use in China on December 2, 2022, named Pneucolin. This vaccine prevents COVID-19 induced by Prototype, Beta and Omicron of SARS-CoV-2 challenge in hamster models in the absence of detectable neutralizing antibodies19. The immunological mechanisms that provide broad-spectrum protection remains unclear.In this study, we investigated the protective immune response induced by dNS1-RBD. The broad-spectrum protective immunity induced by this vaccine mainly includes the following aspects: (i), innate immunity, various cytokines and chemokines containing antiviral functions or initiating local immune responses were detected in lung tissue within 24 hours after vaccination; alveolar macrophages (AMs), dendritic cells (DCs), and natural killker (NK) cells were also activated; (ii), trained immunity that realizes the memory response of innate immunity by reprogramming the chromatin accessibility landscape which reshapes the immune response profile upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, with attenuation of pro-inflammatory factors and pathways; iii), striking local T cell responses covering the upper and lower respiratory tract. Tissue-resident memory T cells (TRMS) were detected in the nasal-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT) and the lung which supports the long-term protective effects. This intranasal vaccine represents an effective broad-spectrum COVID-19 vaccine strategy by inducing specific and non-specific protective immunity, particularly in the respiratory tract.ResultsSingle-cell dynamics in lungs of dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector vaccinated miceBulk RNA-sequencing of lungs from vaccinated and uninfected animals were performed to map the dynamics of the vaccination-induced immune response (Fig S1A, B). Gene sets related to immune response, such as response to interferon-gamma, response to virus, and type I IFN signaling were enriched at 1-day post-immunization in the vaccinated mice (Fig S1C, D), reflecting the rapid recruitment and activation of immune cells upon vaccination. To define the kinetics of immune cell trafficking in greater detail and obtain a higher resolution of pulmonary immune responses triggered by this intranasally delivered vaccine, we performed scRNA-seq at multiple time points (Fig. 1A). After filtering out low-quality cells, red blood cells, and doublets, 158,844 cells were taken into further analysis.Fig. 1: Cellular landscape of dNS1-RBD, dNS1-Vector and CA04 immunized identified by sc-RNA-seq.A Flowchart showing an overview of the single-cell RNA-seq experimental design and schema, CA04 (green), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red), created with adobe illustrator 2020. B Spectral UMAP plot of all cells analyzed from dNS1-RBD-immunized mice, dNS1-Vector-immunized mice, CA04-infected mice and control mice, showing identification of 14 different major cell types annotated by cell-type identity. C Dot plots of cells expressing selected canonical marker genes for identification of 14 different cell types in mice lungs across all samples. The size and color of the dot corresponding to the percentage of cells within the cell population expressing the gene and the average expression of each marker genes, respectively. D UMAP plots showing lung cellular dynamics with dNS1-RBD-immunized, dNS1-Vector-immunized, and CA04-infected mice in different time points. E Box plots showing the proportion and cell numbers of T cells, monocytes, alveolar macrophages, recruited macrophages and NK cells across all groups. CA04 (green), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). n = 2–3 biologically independent mice/group. Box plots show the mean (center line) and minimum and maximum values (bounds of box). Source data are provided as a Source Data file. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection; NK cells natural killer cells.Full size imageUsing canonical lineage-defining markers to annotate clusters, 14 major cell types in the lung were defined (Fig. 1B), including lymphoid, myeloid, and structural cells (Fig. 1C). The overall transcriptome features of dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector groups were comparable and greatly different from the wild-type CA04-infected and uninfected animals (Fig. 1D). The cell numbers and percentages of each cell type in each sample were calculated and compared across different treatments and timepoint. By 44 days post-infection (dpi.), vaccinated mice displayed a significantly high number of T cells, NK cells, and monocytes (mainly non-classical monocytes) compared to CA04-infected and uninfected mice (Fig. 1E). Previous studies have shown that the influenza A virus NS1 protein inhibits both innate and adaptive immune response, while truncation of NS1 protein elicits polyfunctional T-cell responses and increases the ability of the influenza A virus to stimulate innate immune responses17,18. Our previously published work showed that the key cytokine levels associated with the activation of innate immunity, such as IFN-α, IFN-γ, and TNF-α, etc. were rapidly upregulated 24 hours post-immunization in vaccinated mice lungs. Conversely, limited cytokine levels were detected in CA04 virus-infected mice at this time point but peaked later at 5 dpi., staying high with persistent lung inflammation19. These results suggested that the systemic response evoked by dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector is temporally and functionally distinct from its parental influenza virus. The deletion of the NS1 protein makes this influenza A virus-based intranasal vaccine better prime the host with improved immune efficacy.dNS1-RBD rapidly activates T and NK cells in the murine lungIn the cellular analysis of scRNA-seq data of lung samples from vaccinated, CA04 virus-infected, and uninfected mice, a significant increase of T and NK cells at 44 dpi. was observed (Fig. 1E). Flow cytometry analysis confirmed the significant increase in cell frequency and absolute number in vaccinated mice. T cells were clustered into 7 subpopulations based on their differentiation states, including effector, memory, and TRMs, which possess a unique transcriptome profile different from central memory T cells and effector memory T cells (Fig. 2A–C and Fig S2A, B). When examining the functions of upregulated genes in pulmonary T cells of the dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector group, pathways related to cytokine-mediated signaling, cellular response to interferon-gamma, and defense response to virus were activated rapidly at 1 dpi., by contrast, the T-cell immune response triggered by wild-type CA04 virus appeared weak (Fig S2C). To further describe NK cell subpopulations, four distinct clusters were identified (Fig. 2D, F). In vaccinated mice, the fraction of NK cells expressing Ifng (cluster 1) expanded significantly at 1 dpi. and had declined to naïve levels at 7 dpi., by contrast, CA04 virus-infected mice maintained a low-level Ifng+ NK cells response up to 7 days post-infection (Fig. 2E). By 44 dpi., vaccinated mice have a higher proportion (~75%) of NK cells expressing Klrc2 (coding NKG2C protein) (cluster 2) as compared with CA04 virus-infected mice (~43%) and uninfected mice (~66%) (Fig. 2E). Studies showed that a subset of Klrc2+ NK cells might possess an antigen-unspecific memory-like feature with enhanced NK function22,23.Fig. 2: Intranasal immunization of dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector activate T and NK cells.A UMAP plot showing iterative clustering results of T cells reveals subpopulations corresponding to different states of differentiation. B UMAP plots showing T cells dynamics with dNS1-RBD-immunized, dNS1-Vector-immunized, and CA04-infected mice in different time points. C Box plots showing the cell numbers of all different CD8 T cells across all groups. CA04 (green), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). n = 2–3 biologically independent mice/group. Box plots show the mean (center line) and minimum and maximum values (bounds of box). D UMAP plot showing iterative clustering results of NK cells reveals subpopulations corresponding to different states of differentiation. E Stacked barplot showing the proportion of different NK cells. F Dot plots of cells expressing selected canonical marker genes for identification of different cell types in NK cells. G, H Statistical analysis plots for percentage (G) and cell number (H) of NK1.1+ IFN-γ+ in the lung. n = 4 biologically independent mice/group, dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). I, J Statistical analysis plots for percentage (I) and cell number (J) of CD8a+ IFN-γ+ in the lung. n = 4 biologically independent mice/group, dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). K Representative well images of the IFN-γ ELISpot response of the control group and dNS1-RBD group (1- and 7-days post-immunization). L SFCs per million cells of IFN-γ from PBMCs, spleen, and lung were quantified after stimulation of a peptide pool covering the entire spike protein. n = 10 biologically independent mice/group, control (gray), dNS1-RBD-1d (orange) and dNS1-RBD-7d (red). M SFCs per million cells of IFN-γfrom lung were quantified after stimulation of a peptide pool covering the entire spike protein in control and vaccinated group (1 × 106 PFU/mL, 1 × 105 PFU/mL, 1 × 104 PFU/mL, 1 × 103 PFU/mL, 1 × 102 PFU/mL). n = 8 mice biologically independent mice/group. P-values are shown in the figure using different colors compared with the 1 × 106 PFU/mL group is represented in pink (1 × 105 PFU/mL in orange, 1 × 104 PFU/mL group in yellow, 1 × 103 PFU/mL in purple, and 1 × 102 PFU/mL in green). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Box plots show the mean (center line) and minimum and maximum values (bounds of box). Statistics analyses were Mann–Whitney tests (two-sided). Source data are provided as a Source Data file. P-values are shown in the figure using different colors in (G–J), the dNS1-Vector group compared with the control is represented in blue (dNS1-RBD in red). UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection; NK cells: natural killer cells; IFN-γ: interferon-gamma; SFCs: spot-forming cells; PBMCs: peripheral blood mononuclear cells; TRMs: tissue-resident memory T cells.Full size imageTo evaluate specific T cell response elicited by dNS1-RBD or dNS1-Vector, lung mononuclear cells were harvested at 1, 3, 5, and 14 days post single dose immunization. Intracellular IFN-γ expression was analyzed by flow cytometry after ex vivo stimulation using a 15-mer spike-peptide pool (Fig S2D). Single-dose immunization of dNS1-RBD elicits a strong IFN-γ-producing RBD-specific T-cell response in the lung (Fig. 2E, F). The spleens were also analyzed to compare local- and systemic antigen-specific CD8 T cell responses (Fig S2E); the strength of the immune response (number and percentage of total CD8a+ T cells) in spleen-specific T cells was weaker than that in local lung tissues (Fig S2F, G). A similar phenomenon was found in NK cells (Fig S2H–J). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISpot) assays of lymphocytes at 7 dpi, after ex vivo antigen-peptide stimulation revealed that dNS1-RBD induced a robust T cell response in the lung tissue by producing 1974/spot-forming cells (SFCs), which was 3.25 folds (606/SFCs) that of the spleen, and 16.18 folds (122/SFCs, P < 0.0001) that of the peripheral blood, respectively (Fig. 2G, H). By varying the vaccine dose to the animals, the spike-specific T cell responses were induced in a dose-dependent manner, and it was detectable even in the lowest dose group (1 × 102 PFU/mL) (Fig. 2M).dNS1-RBD elicits tissue-resident memory T cell response in the upper and lower respiratory tractGrowing evidence supports a critical role for TRMs in coordinating effective defense against reinfection in the local tissue where they reside24,25. The nasal tissue of rodents contains NALT, which are mucosal-associated lymphoid organs embedded in the nasal passage26. A proportion of T cells within the murine NALT express a memory phenotype (CD44+), which is also observed in human tonsils (NALT equivalent)27. When mice were vaccinated with dNS1-RBD or dNS1-Vector, this memory phenotype population increased (Fig S3A, B). Memory CD8 T cells with the tissue-resident phenotype (CD69+ CD103+) also increased (Fig. 3A), both in number and proportion, 30 days after the second dose (Fig. 3B, C). These data suggested that nasal T cells may be induced to contribute to the protective immunity afforded by this vaccine. Similar increases in the lower respiratory tract were also observed (Fig. 3D, E, S3C-F). Similar to spike-specific T-cell responses, the tissue-resident memory T-cell responses also showed an obvious dose-response relationship (Fig. 3F, G).Fig. 3: Intranasal immunized with dNS1-RBD induces TRMs cover respiratory tract.A Representative flow cytometry contour plots for CD8a+ TRMs in NALT and lung at 30 days post last vaccination, control (gray), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). B, C Bar graph showing the frequency of CD44+ CD8a+ T cells (B) and CD8+ TRMs (C) in NALT and lung 30 days post a prime-boost vaccination. n = 6 biologically independent mice/group, control (gray), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). D, E Bar graph depicting the absolute number of CD44+ CD8a+ T cells (D) and CD8a+ TRMs (E) in the lungs at indicated time points after prime and booster immunization. n = 6 biologically independent mice/group, dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). F, G Bar graph depicting the frequency (F) and the absolute number (G) of TRMs in the lungs after dNS1-RBD immunization (1 × 106 PFU/mL, 1 × 105 PFU/mL, 1 × 104 PFU/mL, 1 × 103 PFU/mL, 1 × 102 PFU/mL). n = 6 biologically independent mice/group, compared with the 1 × 106 PFU/mL group is represented in pink (1 × 105 PFU/mL in orange, 1 × 104 PFU/mL group in yellow, 1 × 103 PFU/mL in purple, and 1 × 102 PFU/mL in green). H Experimental design and schema, created with adobe illustrator 2020. I Bar graph depicting the numbers of IFN-γ SFCs from lung after stimulation of a peptide pool covering the entire spike protein. n = 7–10 biologically independent mice/group, group A: 2 doses of STFK (green), group B:2 doses of STFK and boost with dNS1-RBD (red), group C: single dose of dNS1-RBD (blue), group D: control (gray). J Bar graph depicting the frequency of TRMs in the lungs after booster immunization. n = 9–10 biologically independent mice/group, group A: 2 doses of STFK (green), group B:2 doses of STFK and boost with dNS1-RBD (red), group C: single dose of dNS1-RBD (blue), group D: control (gray). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistics analysis were Mann–Whitney tests (two-sided). Source data are provided as a Source Data file. SFCs: spot-forming cells; TRMs: tissue-resident memory T cells; NALT: Nasal-associated lymphoid tissue.Full size imageGiven the suboptimal local immunity in the respiratory tract induced by the current intramuscular (IM) route COVID-19 vaccine, potential strategies that would promote local immunity after IM immunization need to be identified. So a sequential immunization strategy containing StriFK, which is a SARS-CoV-2 subunit vaccine capable of inducing a potent humoral and cellular immune response in peripheral blood28, and dNS1-RBD boosting were carried out to verify the local immunity enhancement brought by the boosting (Fig. 3H). Compared to mice that received IM immunization alone (group A), an intranasal (IN) booster vaccination of dNS1-RBD at 14 days after the last IM vaccination of StriFK (group B) led to a ~15-fold increase in lung resident T cell responses and promoted RBD-specific IFN-γ produced in the lung by ~45 fold (Fig. 3I, J). Mice in group B also showed increases in lung RBD-specific IFN-γ production and resident memory T cells as compared with mice that received dNS1-RBD alone (group C), although not statistically significant (Fig. 3I, J). These data suggest that by combining IM immunization with an intranasal dNS1-RBD boost, high levels of local lung immune responses were achieved. Previous studies have shown that patients surviving SARS infection generated long-lasting memory T cells29,30. TRMs continue replenishment from circulating memory T cells and provide superior protection against local secondary infections31. These results highlighted the potential of TRMs as key targets for respiratory virus vaccines. Building up protection covering the upper and lower respiratory tract is optimal. Vaccination aimed at generating neutralizing antibodies alone may not be sufficient to protect against new and emerging variants of SARS-CoV-2. A more effective vaccine strategy should be taken into consideration for current and future pandemics.Macrophages and monocytes phenotypes in the murine lung after intranasal vaccinationIn the early stages of infection at 1 dpi., robust, local transcriptome changes were observed in dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector immunized mice. Pathways of anti-viral innate immunity such as RIG-I-like receptor and Toll-like receptor are significantly activated. Responses to interferons were also coordinately upregulated, indicating that the synthesis and secretion of interferons are vigorous. As for the wild-type CA04 virus-infected mice, comparable mRNA expression change was observed at 7 dpi., reflecting a delayed immune response, since, at this time point, signal transduction pathways related to immune responses are negatively regulated in vaccinated mice (Fig. 4A). Viruses have evolved to escape the host’s innate or non-specific immune system in the initial stage of infection. NS1-deleted HIN1-based intranasal vaccine ensures the rapid activation of the first line of defense and prevents subsequent inappropriate immune activation, which may result in severe lung pneumonia.Fig. 4: Anti-inflammation macrophages and monocytes were recruited in the lung.A Heatmap showing the GO and KEGG pathway single-cell GSEA analysis of DC cells, monocytes, neutrophils and NK cells. B UMAP plot showing iterative clustering results of macrophages reveals subpopulations corresponding to different states of differentiation. C Dot plots of cells expressing selected canonical marker genes for identification of different cell types in macrophages. D Box plots showing the cell numbers of all different macrophage subtypes. Box plots show the mean (center line) and minimum and maximum values (bounds of box). CA04 (green), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). n = 2–3 biologically independent mice/group. E Dot plots of cells expressing selected canonical marker genes for identification of different cell types in monocytes. F UMAP plot showing iterative clustering results of monocytes reveal subpopulations corresponding to different states of differentiation. G Stacked barplot showing the proportion of different monocytes. H Dot plots of cell number of different cell types in monocytes. Correlation plot showing cluster enrichment in each group. Dot size proportional to Pearson’s residual of the chi-squared test, while the color represents the degree of association from Pearson’s chi-squared residuals. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Box plots show the mean (center line) and minimum and maximum values (box). GO: Gene Ontology; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; ssGSEA: single-cell gene-set enrichment analysis; DCs: Dendritic Cells; NK cells: natural killer cells; UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection; AMs: alveolar macrophages; RecMs: recruited macrophages.Full size imageLung macrophages, including alveolar macrophages and interstitial macrophages, play crucial roles in host defense, tissue repair, and organ homeostasis32. Sub-clustering of macrophages identified two major groups with unique features, tissue-resident alveolar macrophages (RAMs) and monocytes-derived recruited macrophages (RecMs) (Fig. 4B, C). Analysis of lung macrophages subclusters revealed that at the early stage of infection (1 dpi.), vaccinated mice lungs were particularly rich in recruited macrophages cluster 1 and cluster 3 (RecMs c01 and RecMs c03) (Fig. 4D, E). Of these, cluster 3 showed high expression of Cd38, Cd86, Il1b, Nos2, and Cxcl10, which have been related to M1 polarization33,34,35,36,37, additionally, cluster 1 expressed high levels of Isg15 and Isg20 (Fig. 4C and Fig S4A). CA04-infected mice lungs were mainly represented by tissue-resident macrophages cluster 1 (RAMs c01) showing high expression of M2-like markers (Mrc1, Ym1, Klf4)33,34,35,36,37 (Fig. 4C and Fig S4A). At this time point, lung macrophages represented a pro- and non-inflammatory functional state in vaccinated and wild-type virus-infected mice respectively. By 7 dpi., recruited macrophages have become the predominant macrophages population in CA04-infected mice (Fig. 4D, E and Fig S4A). Conversely, tissue-resident macrophages, predominantly cluster1 (RAMs c01), are the most abundant cells in dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector immunized mice (Fig. 4D, E and Fig S4A). Loss of alveolar macrophages (AMs) induced by infection could be replenished by self-renewal of surviving AMs or infiltration of monocyte-derived macrophages38,39,40. Pulmonary monocytes were divided into three subsets based on their surface expression of Ly6c1, Ly6c2, Ccr2, Sell, Cx3cr1 (Fig. 4E, F)41. Murine Ly6C+ subsets, which are considered the human counterpart of classical and intermediate monocytes, infiltrate into tissues, performing pro-inflammatory functions42,43,44. Ly6C- monocytes, similar to human non-classical monocytes, enter into inflamed tissues to resolve inflammation and promote tissue repair. Under steady-state conditions, they exert a particular function of patrolling and surveillance, sensing viral nucleic acids, which is essential to initiate an innate immune response and restrict virus infection45,46,47. As expected, vaccinated and CA04 virus-infected mice showed distinct temporal dynamics in pro-inflammatory monocytes recruitment (Fig. 4G, H). By 44 dpi., vaccinated mice have a higher proportion (~30%) of non-classical monocytes than that of CA04 virus-infected mice (~16%) and uninfected mice (~17%) (Fig. 4G). Innate immune cells react to viral infections but might also contribute to immunopathology. A harmonized balance between positive and negative regulation of innate immune responses is required to achieve the most favorable outcome for the host48.dNS1-RBD immunization reprogrammed chromatin accessibility of alveolar macrophages and maintained the trained immunity phenotypeIn recent years, the memory effect of the innate immune response (trained immunity) is thought to play an important role in broad-spectrum anti-infection immunity49,50. Innate immunity expresses a memory function that underlies broad heterologous immunity to antigenically diverse pathogens51. During trained immunity, the immunological memory of innate immune responses is broad and not limited to a single category of pathogens51. AMs are key players in the innate pulmonary defense during respiratory infection52. High MHC II expression is considered the trained phenotype of AMs53. In this study, MHC II expression on mouse AMs are significantly elevated after dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector vaccination (Fig. 5A). The upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 was also observed (Fig. 5B, C). The trained immune phenotype of alveolar macrophages weakened as the vaccine dose decreased, although differences can still be observed compared to the control group (Fig. 5D). ATAC-seq analysis was used to identify the potential changes that may occur in the chromatin accessibility of AMs induced by intranasal immunization. Two months after the booster dose, KEGG and GO enrichment analyses showed that differential ATAC-peaks were significantly enriched in pathways related to innate immune response and involved Toll-like- and retinoic acid-inducible gene-1-like receptors (RLRs) (Fig. 5E). A total of 202 upregulated and 194 downregulated peaks were detected in the dNS1-RBD vaccinated mice (Fig. 5F). The dNS1-RBD group gained 810- and lost 760 lost open chromatin regions (OCRs) respectively, as compared with the control group (Fig. 5G). Peaks that were not present in the control group were induced in both the dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector groups in the regulatory region of MHC II genes (H2-Aa and H2-Eb1) (Fig. 5H). OCRs of several antiviral innate immune response genes including TRIM25 and IKBKB are involved in RIG-I mediated antiviral signaling54,55. Toll-like receptors, TLR3 and TLR1, were not detected in the control group compared to the dNS1-RBD group (Fig. 5H). AMs from dNS1-RBD hamsters gained and lost 913- and 1370 OCRs, respectively compared with the control at two weeks post-prime vaccination (Fig. 5I). The differential OCRs showed peaks in regulatory regions of pro-inflammatory cytokines, antiviral response, and toll-like receptor genes in both the dNS1-RBD and the dNS1-Vector group which was undetected in the control group (Fig. 5J).Fig. 5: Trained phenotype of alveolar macrophages induced by dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector.A–C Statistical analysis plots for gMFI of MHC II (A), CD80 (B) and CD86 (C) on AMs in C57BL/6 mice after immunization (dNS1-RBD or dNS1-Vector). n = 6 biologically independent mice/group, control (gray), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). D Statistical analysis plots for gMFI of MHC II on AMs in C57BL/6 mice after vaccine immunization (1 × 106 PFU/mL, 1 × 105 PFU/mL, 1 × 104 PFU/mL, 1 × 103 PFU/mL, 1 × 102 PFU/mL). n = 6 biologically independent mice/group, compared with the 1 × 106 PFU/mL group is represented in pink (1 × 105 PFU/mL in orange, 1 × 104 PFU/mL group in yellow, 1 × 103 PFU/mL in purple, and 1 × 102 PFU/mL in green). E KEGG and GO enrichment result of shared peaks, with color bar on –log10 (q-value) scale. F Venn diagram showing differential ATAC-seq peaks (annotated as promoters) for dNS1-RBD or dNS1-Vector compared to the Control group. G Scatter-plot of differentially detected ATAC-seq peaks (log2FC > 1.5, q-value < 0.05) of AMs (Lung) in the dNS1-RBD vaccination group compared to the control group in C57BL/6. H IGV tracks showing differentially detected peaks related to host defense and antiviral response in C57BL/6 mice from dNS1-RBD vaccination group, dNS1-Vector vaccination group and control group. n = 2 biologically independent mice/group, control (black), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). I Scatter-plot of differentially detected ATAC-seq peaks (log2FC > 1.5, q-value < 0.05) of AMs (BALF) in dNS1-RBD vaccination group compared to control group in hamsters. J IGV tracks showing differentially detected peaks related to host defense and antiviral response in hamsters. n = 2 biologically independent hamsters/group, control (black), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistics analyses were Mann–Whitney tests (two-sided). Source data are provided as a Source Data file. gMFI: Geometry Mean Fluorescence Intensity; MHC-II: major histocompatibility-II; AMs: alveolar macrophages; GO: Gene Ontology; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; ATAC-seq: Assay for Targeting Accessible-Chromatin with high-throughout sequencing; IGV: Integrative genomics viewer; BALF: bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.Full size imageThese results indicated that the innate immune training might be induced by the intranasal vaccination of dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector. The observation of epigenetic programming of innate immune cell supports the notion that the cross-protection effects of this intranasal vaccine might be partially mediated by trained immunity with enhanced non-specific effector responses.Intranasal immunization with dNS1-RBD vaccine protects hamsters from SARS-CoV-2 infectionGolden Syrian hamsters were challenged with beta SARS-CoV-2 variant by contact transmission to mimic patients with severe pneumonia caused by SARS-CoV-219. Hamsters were sacrificed at 1-, 3-, 5 days dpi. for gross lung observation (Fig. 6A). Control hamsters showed continuous body weight loss beginning at 1 dpi. and exhibited weight loss of up to 11.97% at 5 dpi; in contrast, weight loss was not obvious in animals of dNS1-RBD group (mean: +1.24%) (Fig. 6B). Vaccinated hamsters showed a lower viral RNA load in nasal washings at 1 dpi. compared with the control hamsters. The significantly reduced viral RNA load (> 2.0 log) in nasal washings, trachea and lung at 1 dpi. (Fig. 6C), suggesting that an early innate immune response may be elicited in the respiratory tracts and thus restrict SARS-CoV-2 replication. A relatively lower viral RNA load was observed at 3 dpi. in trachea (> 1.0 log) and lung (> 2.0 log), which indicated that the intranasal vaccination inhibits the further infection of viruses from the upper to the lower respiratory tract of hamsters (Fig. 6C). The lung viral loads in vaccinated hamsters were slightly lower than that of the control hamsters at 5 dpi. although this was not statistically significant (Fig. 6C). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of the lung lobes of SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters in the dNS1-RBD group showed significant alleviation of the pathological changes. In contrast, control animals exhibited typical features of severe pneumonia including increased lung lobe consolidation and alveolar destruction, diffusive inflammation, hyaline membrane formation, and severe pulmonary hemorrhage (Fig. 6D). The apparent lesions in the dNS1-RBD group were markedly diminished, and no obvious viral-infection-related lung damage was observed in the gross lung images at 3- and 5 dpi. compared with the control group (Fig. 6D). The pathological severity scores of vaccinated hamsters were significantly lower than those of the control groups (Fig. 6C). The reduced lung inflammation could have been linked with the immediate anti-viral responses of hosts56.Fig. 6: Intranasal immunization with dNS1-RBD vaccine protects hamsters from SARS-CoV-2 infection.A Schema of the experimental design. On days 1, 3, and 5 after cohoused exposure, hamsters from vaccinated and control groups were euthanized for analyses. n = 4 biologically independent hamsters/group, created with adobe illustrator 2020. B Body weight changes of hamsters after cohoused exposure were plotted. The average weight loss of each group at 5 dpi. is indicated as a colored number. n = 4 biologically independent hamsters/group, control (gray) and dNS1-RBD (red). C Bar graph showing the pathological severity scores of lungs and the viral RNA loads from nasal turbinate, trachea, and lung. n = 4 biologically independent hamsters/group, control (gray) and dNS1-RBD (red). D Gross lung images and H&E-stained lung sections from dNS1-RBD vaccinated and control groups. Experiments were repeated 3 times independently with similar results. E Schema of the experimental design, created with adobe illustrator 2020. Hamsters were intranasally vaccinated with dNS1-RBD or dNS1-Vector. F Body weight changes of hamsters after cohoused exposure were plotted. The average weight loss of each group at 5 dpi. is indicated as a colored number, n = 8 biologically independent hamsters/group, control (gray), dNS1-Vector (blue) and dNS1-RBD (red). Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageIn order to validate the non-antigen-specific protective effect, hamsters were challenged by Beta variants through cohoused exposure after intranasally immunized with dNS1-RBD or dNS1-vector (Fig. 6E). The protective efficacy induced by the dNS1-vector was comparable to that induced by the dNS1-RBD at 1, 2, and 3 dpi. (Fig. 6F). Slightly enhanced protection was observed in hamsters vaccinated with dNS1-RBD, as reflected by their body weight change, with body weight change of +1.35% and -2.48% at 5 dpi. respectively (Fig. 6F). To assess the dose-effect relationship, a SARS-CoV-2 challenge experiment was conducted in hamsters receiving varying doses of the vaccine. Consistent with the results of the cellular immune response, the results of body-weight change and lung tissue pathological damage showed that the low-dose groups (1 × 102 PFU/mL and 1 × 103 PFU/mL) exhibited less protective effects than the higher-dose groups (1 × 105 PFU/mL and 1 × 106 PFU/mL) (Fig S5A–C), and in which, the lowest-dose group that with detectable cellular immune responses still showed a protective effect compared to the control group.Intranasal immunization with dNS1-RBD vaccine prevents excessive inflammation triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infectionDistinct gene expression signatures visualized by PCA from hamster lung samples (unchallenged and 1-, 3-, 5 dpi. of the unvaccinated control hamsters and dNS1-RBD vaccinated hamsters) following SARS-CoV-2 infection showed a tight clustering in each group. Unvaccinated control group samples at 3 dpi. and 5 dpi. were clearly separated in principal component 1. Meanwhile, all vaccinated group samples, unvaccinated samples at 1 dpi., and unchallenged samples were reflected in principal component 2 (6.8% of the variance) (Fig. 7A). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the genes upregulated in control hamsters were enriched for response to virus, cytokine production, and regulation of inflammatory response (Fig S6A). Genes involved in inflammatory cytokine production pathways such as Il6, Il1b, and Ifng were elevated at 1 dpi., peaked at 3 dpi., and remained high at 5 dpi. in control hamsters based on GO and KEGG pathway ssGSEA analysis (Fig. 7B, C). Excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting from apoptotic or inflamed cells may further aggravate inflammation57 (Fig. 7C). Overactivated antiviral responses and excessive release of pro-inflammation cytokines are associated with severe immunopathology observed in unvaccinated hamsters. Notably, cytokine profiles for dNS1-RBD vaccinated hamsters were not significantly altered, demonstrating that they were protected from over-activated inflammation (Fig S6B). Dynamics of transcription levels in the vaccinated group exhibited a much steadier state, with mild elevation at 5 dpi. (Fig. 7C). The heatmap showed that different inflammatory signal pathways such as the IFN response, TNF signaling and their downstream signaling (for example, Jak-STAT and NF-κB signaling) were upregulated in the control group yet remained steady in the vaccinated group (Fig. 7C).Fig. 7: Transcriptome analysis of lung reveals distinct immune response between dNS1-RBD immunized and control hamster.A PCA Plot showing the global differences between vaccinated and control groups. B Heatmap showing the GO and KEGG pathway ssGSEA enrichment analysis results. C Heatmap visualization of scaled gene expression levels (TPM) for selected pathways of interest. D Dynamic expression of cytokines in the lungs of hamsters, with error bars shaded (using standard error of the mean), dNS1-RBD (red line), control (gray line). PCA: Principal component analysis; GO: Gene Ontology; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; ssGSEA: single-cell gene-set enrichment analysis.Full size imageDysregulation of cytokines and chemokines is closely associated with severe inflammation, leading to tissue damage and destruction. After SARS-CoV-2 challenge, the expression of IFN-γ and CCL3 rapidly increased and remained high at 5 dpi. in the control group. Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-12, IL-6, IL-1B, and CXCL10 rapidly elevated after SARS-CoV-2 exposure in control hamsters. In addition, anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as TGF-β and IL-10 also underwent a significant change. Conversely, in the vaccinated hamsters, most pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines were relatively unperturbed in the initiation of viral infection and did not significantly progress in the later response, reflecting that homeostasis was maintained in the lung (Fig. 7D). During viral infection, the effective coordination of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and their dynamic balance is required for the purpose of protecting the host. Distinct responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection between the dNS1-RBD vaccinated and unvaccinated hamsters were identified in transcriptome signatures. Prior vaccination with dNS1-RBD markedly alleviated the immunopathology caused by uncontrolled inflammatory responses. Approaches targeting single or multiple cytokines and pathways have been proposed for the abrogation of cytokine storms58,59. The potent immunomodulatory effects of dNS1-RBD facilitate it to simultaneously target multiple pro-inflammatory cytokines and pathways linked with severe COVID-19 pneumonia and poor outcomes in patients.DiscussionAlthough natural infections have occurred on a large scale and intramuscular COVID-19 vaccines have become widely available, controlling SARS-CoV-2 variants remains challenging. At the very beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, our team began to develop an intranasal vaccine based on the NS1-deleted H1N1 vector carrying the gene encoding SARS-CoV-2-RBD (dNS1-RBD)19. To our knowledge, this is the first intranasal spray COVID-19 vaccine that was entered into a phase 3 clinical trial [ChiCTR2100051391]. In phases I and II clinical trials, the vaccine demonstrated an immunogenicity pattern that was highly consistent with animal studies-a weak peripheral immune response20. In recent phase III clinical trial results, this intranasal COVID-19 vaccine exhibited an encouraging efficacy combined with great safety profiles in the elderly or population with underlying chronic disease21. Thrillingly, this vaccine was approved for emergency use in China on December 2, 2022, named Pneucolin. This candidate intranasal spray influenza virus-vectored COVID-19 vaccine conferred broad-spectrum protection against symptomatic COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant in adults regardless of age or underlying medical conditions, both as the primary schedule or heterologous booster doses. dNS1-RBD conferred protection caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection without inducing significant neutralizing antibodies19, and dNS1-vector also showed protective effects (Fig. 6E, F). The protective mechanism of this intranasal vaccine differs from the traditional vaccines and is vastly different from the previous understanding of vaccine immunity.The protective immune mechanism induced by the vaccine includes at least the following four aspects: (1) cellular immune responses covering the upper and lower respiratory tract (Figs. 2, 3), (2) innate immunity (Fig. 4), (3) trained immunity (Fig. 5), (4) antibody targeting RBD19.RBD-specific cellular immune responses were induced in the lung, and the number of IFN-γ spot-forming cells per million lymphocytes was approximately 16 times that in peripheral blood. The response was generated on the 5th day after vaccination and persisted for at least six months in the periphery19. Earlier innate immune- and T-cell responses are of great significance for asymptomatic infection or mild disease after SARS-COV-2 infection60,61,62. TRMs in the respiratory tract and lungs are critical for controlling respiratory viral infections, and provide more timely, and stronger protective immunity than circulating T cells24. Meanwhile, since the upper respiratory tract is one of the first contact sites for inhaled pathogens, the TRMs in the nasal epithelium would prevent the transmission of virus from the upper respiratory tract to the lungs, thereby preventing the development of severe disease26. More importantly, combining intranasal vaccination of dNS1-RBD and traditional intramuscular vaccination could enhance the recruitment of tissue-resident memory T cells (Fig. 3F), providing durable and broad-spectrum immune protection63,64,65. Immunization of dNS1-RBD protects hamsters against challenge with SARS-CoV-2 in a dose-dependent manner, and its protective effect is consistent with the trend of cellular immune responses level. However, it is still difficult to establish a quantitative correlation between cellular response level and protection in this stage, which remains a challenge for the entire field.There is now ample evidence that trained immunity is a component of host innate immune response to pathogens. Epigenetic modification of innate immune cells induced by vaccination with certain live vaccines could provide heterologous protection against unrelated pathogens within a certain period49,50,66. dNS1-RBD vaccination can also alter the host response pattern to SARS-CoV-2 by inducing trained immunity with (1) broad-spectrum antiviral and (2) anti-inflammatory effects. Vaccination of dNS1-RBD activated innate immune cells, accompanied by the alternations in chromatin accessibility, which might allow for a faster and stronger response to secondary infection (Figs. 4, 5). In addition, the infected cells (including structural cells and immune cells) targeted by Influenza A H1 subtypes are highly overlapped with cells targeted by SARS-CoV-2, especially Omicron variant67,68. Immune regulation in structural cells is also widely reported69. Vaccination with dNS1-RBD may reshape the inflammation response by training of immune cells and structural cells, thus confer protection from homologous or heterologous virus infection.Previous studies showed that cross-protective immune response could be induced across influenza viruses of A, B and C types because of common shared T cellular epitopes70, however, the T cellular immune response induced by live-attenuated influenza vaccine is inadequate to provide broader cross-protection71. In a previous work researchers showed that mice immunized with the NS1-shortened H1N1 virus were better protected from lethal challenge with heterologous H3N2 virus as compared with wild-type influenza strain, and, in this case, no correlation was seen between increased survival and viral burden17. It is important to pay attention to the non-specific protection mechanisms related to the trained immunity. Emphasis should also be put on the immunoregulatory components of the immune system that may play an indispensable role in reducing the virus-triggered immunopathology.Our findings also highlight the need for additional studies to quantitatively evaluate the contribution of each type of immunity induced by the vaccine to the efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 infection. So far, all of the vaccines that are successful against systemic respiratory viruses are systemically replicating live virus vaccines that fully encounter the host mucosal and systemic immune system72 and that identifying strong immunologic correlates of protection against mucosal respiratory viruses in general is crucial in the development of next-generation vaccines. Previous studies have identified serum and mucosal immunoglobulin correlates and T cell immune correlates in humans after influenza infection72. However, a human influenza challenge study after vaccination with inactivated vaccines or live-attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV), followed by LAIV challenge, was unable to find any immunologic correlates of protection72 Therefore, additional immune correlate studies in humans are clearly needed and should be a research priority.There are two main limitations in the study. First, while our study provides valuable insights into the efficacy of this vaccine, it is important to note that extrapolation of the induction of immunity by live vaccines in rodent animal models to humans has inevitable limitations. Second, we did not evaluate the potential impact of natural or acquired immunity on the nature of T-cell immunity induced by this vaccine against SARS-CoV-2.Based on the findings of this study and previous knowledge, we suggest that the protective effects induced by intranasal vaccination could be not only dependent on viral clearance, but also through training the immune cells and structural cells in the respiratory tract, remodeling the immune microenvironment, and carrying out certain immunoregulatory effects after the heterologous challenge. This maintains the balance of the immune system and respiratory tissue and attenuates immune-induced tissue injury. Since intramuscular vaccines have been administered on a large worldwide, boosting with intranasal vaccines can establish more comprehensive immune protection in the “anatomical escape” location. At the same time, local cellular immunity and trained immunity in the respiratory tract are considered to be relatively broad-spectrum, which is beneficial for coping with the challenges caused by SARS-COV-2 variants. In conclusion, our findings contribute to the ongoing efforts to develop effective vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 and possibly other mucosal respiratory viruses.MethodsAnimal experimentsAll animal experiments strictly followed the recommendations of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The animal studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Xiamen University.The hamster studies were performed in an animal biosafety level 3 (ABSL-3) laboratory (State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong Kong).C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal Co., Ltd. Golden Syrian hamsters were purchased from Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd.Vaccine formulationdNS1-RBD vaccine was prepared on a large scale at Beijing Wantai Biological Pharmacy Enterprise Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.Mouse immunizationExperimental animals were anesthetized with isoflurane, then intranasally immunized with 50 μL (1 × 106 PFU/mL) of dNS1-RBD, whereas the control group was administered an equal volume of PBS. scRNA-seq analysis were performed on lung tissue collected from C57BL/6 mice after intranasal immunization. Tissues were collected on day 1 and 7 after single-dose vaccination, and on day 44 after booster vaccination.Innate immune response analyses involved intranasal immunization of C57BL/6 mice (4 animals per group) with a single dose, and collection of pulmonary lymphocytes on day 1, 3, and 5 after vaccination.ELISpot analyses of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), splenic lymphocytes, pulmonary lymphocytes, and lymph node cells involved intranasal immunization of C57BL/6 mice with a single dose (10 animals per group), and pulmonary lymphocytes were collected on day 1 and 7 after vaccination.Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) analyses of pulmonary lymphocytes involved intranasal immunization of C57BL/6 mice with a single dose (four animals per group), and collection of pulmonary lymphocytes on day 1, 3, 5, and 14 after vaccination.Tissue-resident T-cell analyses involved intranasal immunization of C57BL/6 mice with a single dose (6 animals per group). Pulmonary lymphocytes were collected on day 7 and 14 after vaccination. In another experiment, mice were intranasally immunized with a booster dose on day 14 and pulmonary lymphocytes were harvested on day 14 and 30 after boost vaccination. For quantitative assessment of the vaccine-induced responses, pulmonary lymphocytes were harvested on day 14 after a booster-dose immunization with varying doses of dNS1-RBD, including 1 × 106 PFU/mL, 1 × 105 PFU/mL, 1 × 104 PFU/mL, 1 × 103 PFU/mL, 1 × 102 PFU/mL.Hamster immunization and infectionThe experimental hamsters (male: female = 1:1) were anesthetized with isoflurane and intranasally immunized with 100 μL of the vaccine or vector (1 × 106 PFU/mL, 0/14 day), whereas the control group was administered with an equal volume of PBS. Hamsters were further evaluated by direct contact challenge with SARS-CoV-2. The donor hamsters (carrying the virus) were intranasally infected with 1 × 103 PFU of SARS-CoV-2. Each donor was transferred to a new cage and co-housed with the hamster of the dNS1-RBD group or control group for one day. The donor was then isolated, and the other hamsters were observed. Weight changes and typical symptoms (piloerection, hunched back, and abdominal respiration) were recorded daily after virus inoculation or contact. Hamsters were euthanized for tissue pathological and virological analyses and RNA-seq on day 1, 3, and 5 after challenge. In another experiment, all vaccinated (dNS1-RBD and dNS1-Vector) and control hamster were euthanized at 5 days post-infection. For dose-effect relationship assessment, hamsters were euthanized for tissue pathological and virological analyses at 5- and 7-days post-infection. Virus challenge studies were performed in an animal biosafety level 3 (ABSL-3) facility. The SARS-CoV-2 strain used in this study was B.1.351 variant AP100 (hCoV-19/China/AP100/2021; GISAID accession No. EPI_ISL_2779638)Organ-specific sample collection and organ dissociationMice were euthanized by exsanguination, and IACUC guidance was approved. Mice were transferred to a biosafety cabinet and their organs were carefully separated. All cells were counted using CountStar software.LungLungs were cut into 0.5-cm pieces, placed in gentleMACS C tubes (Miltenyi) containing collagenase type IV (Gibco) and DNase I (Roche) in PBS containing 2% FBS, and dissociated using a gentleMACS Dissociator (Miltenyi; program m_lung_01). A single-cell suspension was obtained by digesting tissue through a 70 µm cell strainer, and centrifugation at 300 g for 5 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation, 1 mL of cold red blood cell lysis buffer (Solarbio) was added for 2 min to lyse red blood cells. The reaction was stopped by adding 10 mL of cold PBS containing 2% FBS and washed once to remove residual red blood cell lysis buffer. Lymphocytes were obtained from the resulting cell suspensions using density gradient centrifugation (Percoll, SIGMA-ALDRICH). Cells were recovered at the interface of the 80% Percoll layer and the 40% Percoll layer, then washed with PBS + 2% FBS at 500 g for 5 min to remove excess Percoll.Lymph nodesCervical lymph nodes were carefully pinched with tweezers and rinsed several times with cold PBS containing 2% FBS. Lymph nodes were ground and passed through a 70 µm cell strainer. Lymphocytes were washed once and resuspended in PBS containing 2% FBS.SpleenMice were euthanized and their spleen were carefully separated and rinsed several times with cold PBS containing 2% FBS. Spleen were ground and passed through a 70 µm cell strainer and the cells were centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min at 4 °C. 10 ml of cold red blood cell lysis buffer (Solarbio) was added, and the samples were incubated for 5 min at 4 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 20 ml of cold PBS containing 2% FBS and washed once to remove the residual buffer. Lymphocytes were washed once and resuspended in PBS containing 2% FBS.PBMCsMouse peripheral blood was transferred into a centrifuge tube containing sodium heparin, then 4 mL PBS buffer was added and transferred to SepMate™ PBMC isolation tubes (STEMCELL). PBMCs used density gradient centrifugation at 1200 g for 10 min at 25 °C (Ficoll-Paque PREMIUM, GE). PBMCs are obtained from the middle layer cells.Nasal-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT)The lower jaw of the mouse was removed, and a surgical knife was used to carefully cut and excise the upper palate by following the inner contour of mouse incisors and molar teeth. The tissue was digested at 37˚C with collagenase type IV (Gibco) and DNase I (Roche) in PBS containing 2% FBS. A single-cell suspension was obtained from the digested tissue using a 70 µm cell strainer.Flow cytometryThe expression of phenotypic markers, activation markers, and cytokines was evaluated. Briefly, cells were washed and blocked with antiCD16/CD32 (clone 2.4G2) in 0.5 % FBS-PBS for 30 min on ice, then stained with fluorochrome-labeled mAbs for 30 min on ice. ICS assays involved stimulating each sample with pooled spike peptides (1.0 μg/mL) in a U-bottom plate and incubating at 37 °C for 18 h. GolgiPlug (BD Biosciences) was added to the culture at a final concentration of 1:1,000 and cells were further incubated for 6 additional hours. After incubation, cells were washed and stained with fluorochrome-labeled mAbs for 30 min on ice. The stained cells were fixed and permeabilized with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, United States) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were washed and intracellularly stained with fluorochrome-labeled mAbs for 45 min on ice. The antibody reagents used in this study include: CD4 [Clone GK1.5, FTIC], CD8a [Clone 53-6.7, PE/Cy7], NK1.1 [Clone PK136, PerCP/Cy5.5], CD64 [Clone X54-5/7.1, PE /Cy7], CD170 [Clone S17007L, PE], CD11b [Clone M1/70, FITC], CD86 [Clone PO3, BV605], CD11c [Clone N418, BV421], CD45.2 [Clone 104, APC/Cy7], CD4 [Clone GK1.5, APC], CD8a [Clone 53-6.7, FITC], CD103 [Clone 2E7, PE], CD69 [Clone H1.2F3, BV421], CD44 [Clone IM7, PE/Cy7], CD45.2 [Clone 104, PerCP/Cy5.5], CD80 [Clone 16-10A1, PE /Cy7], CD11b [Clone M1/70, PE], CD317 [Clone 927, BV421], Ly-6C [Clone HK1.4, APC/Cy7], MHC class II [clone M5/114.15.2, APC], CD11c [Clone N418, APC]), cytokine expression (IFN-γ [clone XMG1.2, APC]), and a LIVE/DEAD® Fixable Aqua Dead cell stain kit was also used. Stained cells were processed using a BD LSRFORTESSA X-20 (BD Biosciences) flow cytometry system according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Data were analyzed using FlowJo X 10.0.7r2 and GraphPad Prism 8.ELISpot assayDissociated PBMCs, splenic lymphocytes, pulmonary lymphocytes, and lymph node cells were plated at 2.5 × 105 into each well of a mouse IFN-γ ELISpot plate (Dakewe Biotech). And for dose-response relationship, 2 × 105 were plated. Samples were stimulated using pooled Spike peptides of SARS-CoV-2 (Final concentration:1 μg/mL, 15-mer peptide with 11 amino acids covering the spike region, Genscript) and cultured at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 20 h. Spots were scanned, counted, and quantified using the CTL S6 Universal Analyzer (Cellular Technology Limited) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.SARS-CoV-2 and dNS1-RBD RNA quantificationDetection of viral RNA levels was performed in hamster lungs using quantitative RT-PCR. Lung tissue was homogenized using TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and RNA extraction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (QIAamp Viral RNA mini kit, Qiagen). Viral RNA quantification was performed by measuring the copy number of the N gene using a SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR kit (Wantai, Beijing, China), whereas CA4-dNS1-nCoV-RBD was quantified using RBD-targeted primers and the NS gene.HistopathologyHamster lung tissues were fixed with 10% formalin for 48 h, embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Whole-slide images of the lung sections were captured using a Leica Aperio Versa 200 microscope. Pathological lung lesions were scored based on (i) Alveolar septum thickening and consolidation; (ii) hemorrhage, exudation, pulmonary edema, and mucous; (iii) recruitment and infiltration of inflammatory immune cells. For each lobe, a score was determined based on the severity and percentage of injured areas. Four independent lobes of the lung tissues were scored and average lung pathological score of each individual hamster was used for pathological evaluation.Single-cell RNA sequencingSingle-cell suspensions with 1 × 105 cells/mL in concentration in PBS were prepared. Single-cell suspensions were loaded into microfluidic devices and scRNA-seq libraries were constructed following the Singleron GEXSCOPER protocol by GEXSCOPER Single-Cell RNA Library Kit (Singleron Biotechnologies). Indivaidual libraries of each sample were then dilyted to 4 nM, pooled and sequenced on Illumina novaseq 6000 with 150 bp paired end reads.Analysis of single-cell RNA sequencePre-processThe pre-process of the scRNA-seq data was mainly based on the CeleScope software (version 1.10.0) under a CentOS 7.9 platform. The mouse genome (GRCm38) fasta file and gene annotation files were downloaded from ENSEMBL(ftp.ensembl.org), and then the index was built by using ‘celescope rna mkref’ function. The raw data in fastq format were processed and mapped to the mouse genome (GRCm38) by following the shell scripts generated with the celescope multi_rna pipeline with ‘--cell_calling_method auto --allowNoPolyT --mod shell’ command, which generated the gene expression matrix of each sample for further analysis.scRNA-seq quantifications, clustering, and reductionR package Seurat (version 4.1.1) was used for single-cell data analysis under an R 4.1.3 platform. The original expression matrix for each sample was imported and filtered with at least 300 genes present in each cell and at least 3 cells per gene expressed. Furthermore, cells with high detection rates of mitochondrial gene expression were removed. Then the raw expression matrix was logged normalized and 6000 highly variable genes were scaled for the dimension reduction. Principal component analysis (PCA) was calculated based on the selected variable genes, and the most significant 50 principal components (PCs) were chosen as the input data for Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) for visualization and identifying clusters of cells by a shared nearest neighbor (SNN) modularity optimization based on Louvain methods.Removing doublet, cell type annotation, and cell cycle detectionTo detect the doublet, DoubletFinder (version 2.0.3) were performed on each sample’s dataset, which cells were annotated as doublet were removed, furthermore those cells express conserved marker genes from two cell types were also considered as doublet and removed artificially. And to correct the batch effect and classify the cell types within the dataset, we redo the clustering and reduction with the Reciprocal PCA (RPCA) integration method. Then FindAllMarkers function were used to find the marker genes for each cluster and referring to these unbiased marker genes and conserved marker genes based on prior knowledge, all clusters were classified into specific cell types. Cell cycle analysis were performed through the CellCycleScoring pipeline within the Seurat Package.Single-cell differential expression gene analysis and gene-set enrichment analysisThe differential expression gene analysis was performed by using the MAST methods (version 1.20.0) provided in the R package Libra (version 1.0.0). In each comparison, all the genes were ranked by log fold change, and then the GSEA enrichment analysis were performed by using R package clusterProfiler (version 4.2.2) and fgsea (version 1.20.0).Single-cell ssGSEA analysisThe ssGSEA analyses were performed on the raw count matrix by using R packages GSVA (version 1.42.0), GSEABase (version 1.56.0), and Misgdbr (version 7.5.1).Bulk RNA sequencingThe hamster lung lobe was removed, shredded into small pieces and stored in RNA Later Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for a maximum of 24 h at 4 °C. Lung tissue was homogenized using TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and RNA extraction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen)). The RNA samples were sent to OE Biotech Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) for RNA purification, cDNA library construction, and sequencing.ATAC sequencingHamster lungs were collected 2 months post-vaccination and sorted for bronchoalveolar lavage AMs using a BD FACS Aria Fusion machine. One hundred thousand sorted cells were centrifuged at 500 × g for 10 min at 4 °C per replicate. Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2, and 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630). Libraries were prepared using the TruePrep DNA library prep kit V2 for Illumina (Vazyme) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were cleaned up with AMPure XP beads (Beckman coulter) at a ratio of 0.7 and the quality was assessed using the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Libraries were sequenced with 150 paired ends using a NovaSeq 6000 instrument (Illumina) for an average of 20 million reads per sample.Analysis of bulk RNA-sequencing datacDNA libraries were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq X Ten platform and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated. Approximately 49.96 M raw reads were generated for each sample. Raw data (raw reads) in fastq format were initially processed using Trimmomatic and low-quality reads were removed to generate approximately 48.42 M clean reads for each sample for further analyses. The clean reads were mapped to the mouse genome (GRCm39) and hamster genome (BCM_Maur_2.0) using hisat2 version 2.2.1, then sorted using samtools version 1.15 for differentially expressed gene analysis. The raw count matrix was quantified using featureCounts version 2.0.1, and the transcripts per kilobase million (TPM) of each gene were calculated. Differential expression analysis was performed using R package DESeq2 version 1.34.0. A P value < 0.05, and foldchange > 2 was set as the threshold for significantly different expressions. Hierarchical cluster analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was performed to determine the expression patterns in different groups and samples.The enrichment analysis of DEGs through Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and gene-set enrichment analysis (GSEA) were performed using R package clusterprofile version 4.2.0 and fgsea version 1.20.0. Time-series analysis was performed using R package Mfuzz version 2.54.0. All visualizations related to RNA-seq analysis were made using R packages ggplot2 version 3.3.6, ComplexHeatmap version 2.10.0, and enrichplot version 1.14.1.Pre-processing and analysis of bulk ATAC-seq dataQuality control of the original ATAC-seq read file was performed using fasqc version 0.11.9 and multiqc version 1.12 software, and the raw data were trimmed using Trim_galore version 0.6.7 to remove the adaptors. The data were aligned to the GRCm39 and BCM_Maur_2.0 genome separately using Bowtie2 version 2.4.5 with the ‘--very-sensitive -X 2000’ parameter, followed by sorting using samtools version 1.15. Duplicated and unpaired reads were removed using the picard ‘MarkDuplicates’ command. Reads with mapping quality <30, and reads aligned to the mitochondria chromosome were also removed. All downstream analyses were performed on the filtered reads. The bam file for all samples was converted to a bed file and then callpeak using MACS2 version 2.2.7.1 with the ‘-nomodel --shift -100 --extsize 200’ parameter.Differential peak analysis was processed using bedtools to merge the peak file and featureCounts version 2.0.1 was used to construct the matrix; DESeq2 was then used to identify the differential peaks.Coverage files from filtered bam files were produced using deeptools version 3.5.1 bamCoverage command. Each position was normalized with ‘—normalizeUsing RPGC,’ followed by conversion to bigWig format and visualization using IGV software.Statistics and visualizationStatistical analyses were performed with Prism 8 (GraphPad software). Bars represent the mean. Statistical significance of two group was performed with Mann–Whitney tests. Statistical significance of three or more than three was performed with Kruskal–Wallis tests with Dunn’s multiple comparisons test.And the visualization of RNA-seq and scRNA-seq analysis was performed by using R package ggplot2 (version 3.3.6) and ComplexHeatmap (version 2.10.0).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The raw and processed data of RNA-seq, ATAC-seq and scRNA-seq experiment generated in this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository under SuperSeries accession code GSE227649. Any other raw data or non-commercial material used in this study are available from the corresponding author upon request. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesWorld Health, O. Considerations for implementing and adjusting public health and social measures in the context of COVID-19: interim guidance, 2023 (World Health Organization, 2023).Fontanet, A. & Cauchemez, S. COVID-19 herd immunity: where are we? Nat. Rev. Immunol. 20, 583–584 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Young, M., Crook, H., Scott, J. & Edison, P. Covid-19: virology, variants, and vaccines. BMJ Med. 1, e000040 (2022).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gruell, H. et al. Antibody-mediated neutralization of SARS-CoV-2. Immunity 55, 925–944 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar DeFrancesco, L. COVID-19 antibodies on trial. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 1242–1252 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270–273 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Sia, S. F. et al. Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in golden hamsters. Nature 583, 834–838 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Harvey, W. T. et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants, spike mutations and immune escape. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 409–424 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Andrews, N. et al. Covid-19 vaccine effectiveness against the Omicron (B.1.1.529) Variant. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 1532–1546 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sokal, A. et al. Analysis of mRNA vaccination-elicited RBD-specific memory B cells reveals strong but incomplete immune escape of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant. Immunity 55, 1096–1104.e1094 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Shi, J. et al. Susceptibility of ferrets, cats, dogs, and other domesticated animals to SARS-coronavirus 2. Science 368, 1016–1020 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chandler, J. C. et al. SARS-CoV-2 exposure in wild white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2114828118 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Alu, A. et al. Intranasal COVID-19 vaccines: from bench to bed. EBioMedicine 76, 103841 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hassan, A. O. et al. A single-dose intranasal ChAd vaccine protects upper and lower respiratory tracts against SARS-CoV-2. Cell 183, 169–184.e113 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mettelman, R. C., Allen, E. K. & Thomas, P. G. Mucosal immune responses to infection and vaccination in the respiratory tract. Immunity 55, 749–780 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Afkhami, S. et al. Respiratory mucosal delivery of next-generation COVID-19 vaccine provides robust protection against both ancestral and variant strains of SARS-CoV-2. Cell 185, 896–915.e819 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vasilyev, K., Shurygina, A. P., Sergeeva, M., Stukova, M. & Egorov, A. Intranasal immunization with the influenza A virus encoding truncated NS1 protein protects mice from heterologous challenge by restraining the inflammatory response in the lungs. Microorganisms 9, https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9040690 (2021).Wang, P. et al. Generation of DelNS1 influenza viruses: a strategy for optimizing live attenuated influenza vaccines. mBio 10, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02180-19 (2019).Chen, J. et al. A live attenuated virus-based intranasal COVID-19 vaccine provides rapid, prolonged, and broad protection against SARS-CoV-2. Sci. Bull (Beijing). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scib.2022.05.018 (2022).Zhu, F. et al. Safety and immunogenicity of a live-attenuated influenza virus vector-based intranasal SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in adults: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 and 2 trials. Lancet Respir Med. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2213-2600(22)00131-x (2022).Xia, N. et al. The efficacy and safety of an intranasal spray COVID-19 vaccine in a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled phase III trial during Omicron period. https://doi.org/10.21203s.3.rs-2407050/v1 (2023).Lopez-Vergès, S. et al. Expansion of a unique CD57+ NKG2Chi natural killer cell subset during acute human cytomegalovirus infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 14725–14732 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Pahl, J. H. W., Cerwenka, A. & Ni, J. Memory-like NK cells: remembering a previous activation by cytokines and NK cell receptors. Front. Immunol. 9, 2796 (2018).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zens, K. D., Chen, J. K. & Farber, D. L. Vaccine-generated lung tissue-resident memory T cells provide heterosubtypic protection to influenza infection. JCI Insight 1, https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.85832 (2016).Szabo, P. A., Miron, M. & Farber, D. L. Location, location, location: tissue resident memory T cells in mice and humans. Sci. Immunol. 4, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.aas9673 (2019).Pizzolla, A. et al. Resident memory CD8+ T cells in the upper respiratory tract prevent pulmonary influenza virus infection. Sci. Immunol. 2, eaam6970 (2017).Article PubMed Google Scholar Pizzolla, A. et al. Nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALTs) support the recall but not priming of influenza virus-specific cytotoxic T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 5225–5230 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Wu, Y. et al. A recombinant spike protein subunit vaccine confers protective immunity against SARS-CoV-2 infection and transmission in hamsters. Sci. Transl. Med. 13, https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abg1143 (2021).Le Bert, N. et al. SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell immunity in cases of COVID-19 and SARS, and uninfected controls. Nature 584, 457–462 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Vabret, N. et al. Immunology of COVID-19: current state of the science. Immunity 52, 910–941 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zheng, M. Z. M. & Wakim, L. M. Tissue resident memory T cells in the respiratory tract. Mucosal Immunol. 15, 379–388 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hoeffel, G. & Ginhoux, F. Ontogeny of tissue-resident macrophages. Front. Immunol. 6, 486 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Orecchioni, M., Ghosheh, Y., Pramod, A. B. & Ley, K. Macrophage polarization: different gene signatures in M1(LPS+) vs. classically and M2(LPS-) vs. alternatively activated macrophages. Front. Immunol. 10, 1084 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martinez, F. O., Sica, A., Mantovani, A. & Locati, M. Macrophage activation and polarization. Front. Biosci. 13, 453–461 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gordon, S. Alternative activation of macrophages. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3, 23–35 (2003).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Liao, X. et al. Krüppel-like factor 4 regulates macrophage polarization. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 2736–2749 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yao, Y., Xu, X. H. & Jin, L. Macrophage polarization in physiological and pathological pregnancy. Front. Immunol. 10, 792 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hashimoto, D. et al. Tissue-resident macrophages self-maintain locally throughout adult life with minimal contribution from circulating monocytes. Immunity 38, 792–804 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Machiels, B. et al. A gammaherpesvirus provides protection against allergic asthma by inducing the replacement of resident alveolar macrophages with regulatory monocytes. Nat. Immunol. 18, 1310–1320 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Li, F. et al. Monocyte-derived alveolar macrophages autonomously determine severe outcome of respiratory viral infection. Sci. Immunol. 7, eabj5761 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Italiani, P. & Boraschi, D. From monocytes to M1/M2 macrophages: phenotypical vs. functional differentiation. Front. Immunol. 5, 514 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yang, J., Zhang, L., Yu, C., Yang, X. F. & Wang, H. Monocyte and macrophage differentiation: circulation inflammatory monocyte as biomarker for inflammatory diseases. Biomark. Res. 2, 1 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yang, J. et al. Chronic kidney disease induces inflammatory CD40+ monocyte differentiation via homocysteine elevation and DNA hypomethylation. Circ. Res. 119, 1226–1241 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kapellos, T. S. et al. Human monocyte subsets and phenotypes in major chronic inflammatory diseases. Front. Immunol. 10, 2035 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cros, J. et al. Human CD14dim monocytes patrol and sense nucleic acids and viruses via TLR7 and TLR8 receptors. Immunity 33, 375–386 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Guy, C. & Bowie, A. G. Recent insights into innate immune nucleic acid sensing during viral infection. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 78, 102250 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mildner, A., Marinkovic, G. & Jung, S. Murine monocytes: origins, subsets, fates, and functions. Microbiol. Spectr. 4, https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.MCHD-0033-2016 (2016).Chathuranga, K., Weerawardhana, A., Dodantenna, N. & Lee, J. S. Regulation of antiviral innate immune signaling and viral evasion following viral genome sensing. Exp. Mol. Med. 53, 1647–1668 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Netea, M. G. et al. Trained immunity: a tool for reducing susceptibility to and the severity of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Cell 181, 969–977 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mantovani, A. & Netea, M. G. Trained innate immunity, epigenetics, and Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 1078–1080 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Levy, O. & Netea, M. G. Innate immune memory: implications for development of pediatric immunomodulatory agents and adjuvanted vaccines. Pediatr. Res. 75, 184–188 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Xing, Z. et al. Innate immune memory of tissue-resident macrophages and trained innate immunity: Re-vamping vaccine concept and strategies. J. Leukoc. Biol. 108, 825–834 (2020).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Yao, Y. et al. Induction of autonomous memory alveolar macrophages requires T cell help and is critical to trained immunity. Cell 175, 1634–1650.e1617 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Timmer, A. M. & Nizet, V. IKKbeta/NF-kappaB and the miscreant macrophage. J. Exp. Med. 205, 1255–1259 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu, Z. et al. NDR2 promotes the antiviral immune response via facilitating TRIM25-mediated RIG-I activation in macrophages. Sci. Adv. 5, eaav0163 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Plaçais, L. et al. Immune interventions in COVID-19: a matter of time? Mucosal Immunol. 15, 198–210 (2022).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mittal, M., Siddiqui, M. R., Tran, K., Reddy, S. P. & Malik, A. B. Reactive oxygen species in inflammation and tissue injury. Antioxid. Redox Signal 20, 1126–1167 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mehta, P., Cron, R. Q., Hartwell, J., Manson, J. J. & Tattersall, R. S. Silencing the cytokine storm: the use of intravenous anakinra in haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis or macrophage activation syndrome. Lancet Rheumatol. 2, e358–e367 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yang, L. et al. The signal pathways and treatment of cytokine storm in COVID-19. Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 6, 255 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tan, A. T. et al. Early induction of functional SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells associates with rapid viral clearance and mild disease in COVID-19 patients. Cell Rep. 34, 108728 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced host response to SARS-CoV-2 drives development of COVID-19. Cell 181, 1036–1045.e1039 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bergamaschi, L. et al. Longitudinal analysis reveals that delayed bystander CD8+ T cell activation and early immune pathology distinguish severe COVID-19 from mild disease. Immunity 54, 1257–1275.e1258 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, T. et al. Lung-resident memory CD8 T cells (TRM) are indispensable for optimal cross-protection against pulmonary virus infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 95, 215–224 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Turner, D. L. et al. Lung niches for the generation and maintenance of tissue-resident memory T cells. Mucosal Immunol. 7, 501–510 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Teijaro, J. R. et al. Cutting edge: Tissue-retentive lung memory CD4 T cells mediate optimal protection to respiratory virus infection. J. Immunol. 187, 5510–5514 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Netea, M. G. et al. Trained immunity: a program of innate immune memory in health and disease. Science 352, aaf1098 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Flerlage, T., Boyd, D. F., Meliopoulos, V., Thomas, P. G. & Schultz-Cherry, S. Influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2: pathogenesis and host responses in the respiratory tract. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 425–441 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sungnak, W. et al. SARS-CoV-2 entry factors are highly expressed in nasal epithelial cells together with innate immune genes. Nat. Med. 26, 681–687 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Thomas Krausgruber, N. F. et al. Structural cells are key regulators of organ-specific immune responses. Nature 583, 296–302 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central ADS Google Scholar Koutsakos, M. et al. Human CD8(+) T cell cross-reactivity across influenza A, B and C viruses. Nat. Immunol. 20, 613–625 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ohmit, S. E. et al. Prevention of antigenically drifted influenza by inactivated and live attenuated vaccines. N. Engl. J. Med. 355, 2513–2522 (2006).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Morens, D. M., Taubenberger, J. K. & Fauci, A. S. Rethinking next-generation vaccines for coronaviruses, influenzaviruses, and other respiratory viruses. Cell Host Microbe 31, 146–157 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis study was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China grants 81991491 (to N.X.), 32170943 (to T.Z.), 31730029 (to N.X.), and 82041038 (to Yixin C.); Program on Key Research Project of China 2020YFC0842600 (to N.X.); Guangdong-Hongkong-Macau Joint Laboratory grant 2019B121205009 (to Y.G.); Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province 2020J06007 (to T.Z.) and 2021J02006 (to Yixin C.); Xiamen Youth Innovation Fund Project 3502Z20206060 (to T.Z.); and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 20720220003 (to N.X.).Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Liang Zhang, Yao Jiang, Jinhang He, Junyu Chen, Ruoyao Qi, Lunzhi Yuan, Tiange Shao, Hui Zhao.Authors and AffiliationsState Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics; National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious Diseases, School of Public Health & School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 361102, Xiamen, Fujian, ChinaLiang Zhang, Yao Jiang, Jinhang He, Junyu Chen, Ruoyao Qi, Lunzhi Yuan, Congjie Chen, Yaode Chen, Xijing Wang, Xing Lei, Chunlan Zhuang, Ming Zhou, Jian Ma, Wei Liu, Man Yang, Rao Fu, Yangtao Wu, Feng Chen, Hualong Xiong, Meifeng Nie, Yiyi Chen, Kun Wu, Mujin Fang, Yingbin Wang, Zizheng Zheng, Shoujie Huang, Shengxiang Ge, Tong Cheng, Quan Yuan, Ting Wu, Jun Zhang, Yixin Chen, Tianying Zhang & Ningshao XiaTsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, Laboratory of Dynamic Immunobiology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, 100084, Beijing, ChinaTiange Shao & Hai QiNational Institute for Food and Drug Control, 102629, Beijing, ChinaHui Zhao & Changgui LiState Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, 361102, Xiamen, Fujian, ChinaQingxiang Gao & Shih Chin ChengXiang An Biomedicine Laboratory, 361102, Xiamen, Fujian, ChinaMujin Fang, Yingbin Wang, Zizheng Zheng, Shoujie Huang, Shengxiang Ge, Tong Cheng, Quan Yuan, Ting Wu, Jun Zhang, Yixin Chen, Tianying Zhang & Ningshao XiaState Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 999077, ChinaHuachen Zhu & Yi GuanGuangdong-Hong Kong Joint Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases/Joint Laboratory for International Collaboration in Virology and Emerging Infectious Diseases, Joint Institute of Virology (STU/HKU), Shantou University, 515063, Shantou, ChinaHuachen Zhu & Yi GuanAuthorsLiang ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYao JiangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJinhang HeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJunyu ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRuoyao QiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLunzhi YuanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTiange ShaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHui ZhaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCongjie ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYaode ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXijing WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXing LeiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarQingxiang GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChunlan ZhuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMing ZhouView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJian MaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarWei LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMan YangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRao FuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYangtao WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFeng ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHualong XiongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMeifeng NieView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYiyi ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKun WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMujin FangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYingbin WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarZizheng ZhengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShoujie HuangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShengxiang GeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarShih Chin ChengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHuachen ZhuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTong ChengView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarQuan YuanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTing WuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJun ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYixin ChenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarTianying ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChanggui LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHai QiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYi GuanView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNingshao XiaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsConceptualization, T.Z., and N.X.; Data curation, L.Z., Y.J., J.H., J.C., R.Q., L.Y., T.S., and Hui Z.; Formal analysis, L.Z., Y.J., and J.H.; Investigation, L.Z., Y.J., J.H., J.C., R.Q., L.Y., T.S., Hui Z., C.C., Yaode C., X.W., X.L., Q.G., C.Z., M.Z., J.M., W.L., M.Y., R.F., Yangtao W., F.C., H.X., M.N., Yiyi C., K.W., and M.F.; Methodology, L.Z., Y.J., J.H., J.C., R.Q., L.Y., and T.S.; Visualization, L.Z., Y.J., J.H., J.C., R.Q., L.Y., and T.S.; Validation, L.Z., Y.J., and R.Q.; Resources, L.Z., J.Z., Yixin C. T.Z., H.Q., Y.G., and N.X.; Funding acquisition, Yixin C., T.Z., Y.G., and N.X.; Project administration, T.Z.; Supervision, J.Z., T.W., Yixin C., T.Z., C.L., H.Q., Y.G., and N.X.; Writing-original draft, L.Z., Y.J., J.H., and T.Z.; Writing-review & editing, Yingbin W., Z.Z., S.H., S.G., S.C., Huachen Z., T.C., Q.Y., T.W., J.Z., Yixin C., T.Z., C.L., H.Q., Y.G., and N.X.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Ting Wu, Jun Zhang, Yixin Chen, Tianying Zhang, Changgui Li, Hai Qi, Yi Guan or Ningshao Xia.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interest. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileReporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleZhang, L., Jiang, Y., He, J. et al. Intranasal influenza-vectored COVID-19 vaccine restrains the SARS-CoV-2 inflammatory response in hamsters. Nat Commun 14, 4117 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39560-9Download citationReceived: 10 August 2022Accepted: 19 June 2023Published: 11 July 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39560-9Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by Inhalable hybrid nanovaccines with virus-biomimetic structure boost protective immune responses against SARS-CoV-2 variants Shuqi WangPeiyang DingGaiping Zhang Journal of Nanobiotechnology (2024) Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingOngoing avian influenza outbreaks in animals pose risk to humans Discover About FAO News Multimedia Main topics Statistics Members Publications English العربية 中文 Français Русский Español Share Close Animal health Areas of work Our programmes Animal diseases Highly pathogenic avian influenza Foot-and-mouth disease Situation updates FAO Reference Centres About Application and requirements Reporting News and Events News Stories Events Resources Publications Videos Webinars Tools Ongoing avian influenza outbreaks in animals pose risk to humans 12/07/2023 Situation analysis and advice to countries from FAO, WHO, WOAHThe current outbreaks of avian influenza (also called “bird flu”) have caused devastation in animal populations, including poultry, wild birds, and some mammals, and harmed farmers’ livelihoods and the food trade. Although largely affecting animals, these outbreaks pose ongoing risks to humans. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) are urging countries to work together across sectors to save as many animals as possible and to protect people. Avian influenza viruses normally spread among birds, but the increasing number of H5N1 avian influenza detections among mammals—which are biologically closer to humans than birds are—raises concern that the virus might adapt to infect humans more easily. In addition, some mammals may act as mixing vessels for influenza viruses, leading to the emergence of new viruses that could be more harmful to animals and humans. The goose/Guangdong-lineage of H5N1 avian influenza viruses first emerged in 1996 and have been causing outbreaks in birds since then. Since 2020, a variant of these viruses belonging to the H5 clade 2.3.4.4b has led to an unprecedented number of deaths in wild birds and poultry in many countries in Africa, Asia and Europe. In 2021, the virus spread to North America, and in 2022, to Central and South America. In 2022, 67 countries in five continents reported H5N1 high pathogenicity avian influenza outbreaks in poultry and wild birds to WOAH, with more than 131 million domestic poultry lost due to death or culling in affected farms and villages. In 2023, another 14 countries reported outbreaks, mainly in the Americas, as the disease continues to spread. Several mass death events have been reported in wild birds, caused by influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses. Monitoring the recent surge in outbreaks among mammalsRecently, there have been increasing reports of deadly outbreaks among mammals also caused by influenza A(H5)—including influenza A(H5N1)—viruses. 10 countries across three continents have reported outbreaks in mammals to WOAH since 2022. There are likely to be more countries where outbreaks have not yet been detected or reported. Both land and sea mammals have been affected, including outbreaks in farmed mink in Spain, seals in the United States of America, and sea lions in Peru and Chile, with at least 26 species known to have been affected. H5N1 viruses have also been detected in domestic animals such as cats and dogs in several countries, with recent detections of H5N1 in cats announced by authorities in Poland.“There is a recent paradigm change in the ecology and epidemiology of avian influenza which has heightened global concern as the disease spread to new geographical regions and caused unusual wild bird die-offs, and alarming rise in mammalian cases,” said Dr Gregorio Torres, Head of the Science Department at WOAH.Assessing the risk to humansSporadic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus detections in humans have also been reported, but remain very rare, with 8 cases reported since December 2021. Infections in humans can cause severe disease with a high mortality rate. The human cases detected thus far are mostly linked to close contact with infected birds and contaminated environments. "With the information available so far, the virus does not appear to be able to transmit from one person to another easily, but vigilance is needed to identify any evolution in the virus that can change that,” said Dr Sylvie Briand, Director of Epidemic and Pandemic Preparedness and Prevention, WHO. “WHO is working closely with FAO and WOAH, and laboratory networks to monitor the evolution of these viruses, looking for signals of any change that could be more dangerous to humans. We encourage all countries to increase their ability to monitor these viruses and to detect any human cases. This is especially important as the virus is now affecting countries with limited prior experience in avian flu surveillance."Studies are underway to identify any changes in the virus that may help the virus to spread more easily among mammals, including humans. “The epidemiology of H5N1 continues to rapidly evolve,” said Keith Sumption, Chief Veterinary Officer, FAO. “FAO brings attention to the need for vigilance and timely sharing of genetic sequences to monitor the molecular epidemiology for risk assessment and better disease control.”Curbing the spread of avian influenzaGiven the unprecedented spread of the A(H5N1) avian influenza virus among birds and mammals, and the potential risk to human health, the tripartite partners—FAO, WHO and WOAH—urge countries to take the following actions:Prevent avian influenza at its source, mainly through enhanced biosecurity measures in farms and in poultry value chains, and apply good hygiene practices. WOAH members, in consultation with the poultry sector, may consider the vaccination of poultry as a complementary disease control tool based on sound surveillance and taking into account local factors such as circulating virus strains, risk assessment and vaccination implementation conditions.Rapidly detect, report and respond to animal outbreaks as the first line of defence. When an infection is detected in animals, countries are encouraged to implement control strategies as described in WOAH standards.Strengthen influenza surveillance in animals and humans. To allow for early response, risk-based surveillance in animals should be enhanced before and during high-risk periods. Animal cases of avian influenza should be reported to WOAH in a timely manner. Genetic sequencing should be conducted periodically to detect any changes in the viruses already present in the area or the introduction of new viruses. In humans, the following should be prioritized: (i) surveillance for severe acute respiratory infections and influenza-like illnesses, (ii) careful review of any unusual epidemiological patterns, (iii) reporting of human infections under the International Health Regulations, and (iv) sharing of influenza viruses with WHO Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) Collaborating Centres for Reference and Research on Influenza. Conduct epidemiological and virological investigations around animal outbreaks and human infections. Surveillance should be enhanced to rapidly detect and investigate further suspected animal and human cases. Share the genetic sequence data of viruses from humans, animals or their environments in publicly accessible databases rapidly, even before peer-reviewed publication.Encourage collaboration between the animal and human health sectors, especially in the areas of information sharing, joint risk assessment and response. Communicate the risk. Alert and train healthcare workers and occupationally-exposed persons on ways to protect themselves. The general public as well as animal workers should be advised to avoid contact with sick and dead animals, and to report these to animal health authorities. They should also be advised to seek medical care if unwell and to report any exposure to animals to their healthcare provider.Ensure influenza pandemic preparedness at all levels. FAO, WHO and WOAH have been convening experts to review the situation, monitoring the rapidly evolving nature of the virus, and updating recommendations for curbing its spread, in addition to working with countries in preparedness and response, and facilitating collaboration across countries and sectors. The spread of the virus to five continents speaks to the need for global cooperation and alertness to protect animals, people and economies. Notes to editorsSpecies of mammals known to be infected with A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses to date: ferret, mink, European otter, North American river otter, marine otter, European badger, skunk, Virginia opossum, Amur leopard, Amur tiger, mountain lion, fisher, European polecat, lynx, bobcat, domestic cat, red fox, coyote, racoon, racoon dog, South American bush dog, American black bear, brown Bear, grizzly bear, Kodiak bear, domestic pig (serology only), grey seal, harbour seal, fur seal, sea lion, porpoise, bottlenose dolphin, short-beaked common dolphin, white sided dolphin, dogs, Japanese raccoon dogs, Beech marten, Caspian seals, Asiatic black bear, Chilean dolphin, Burmeister’s porpoise. More studies are needed to understand baseline levels of infection in wild mammals.Current virological assessment/summaryMarkers for mammalian adaptation:The molecular marker 627K, or its equivalents such as 701N, in the PB2 gene have been detected in some but not all sequences of viruses obtained from mammalian infections. It has been detected in very few sporadic wild bird and poultry cases. These markers are known to increase viral replication in mammalian cells.None of the viruses from infected mammals, including humans, have changes indicating increased specificity of binding to human-like receptors.In studies on viruses from wild birds and poultry, there is no indication that the viruses have changed their preference for binding to avian-like receptors. However, some genetic mutations are present which have been demonstrated to increase the ability to bind to human-like receptors.The virus isolated from the infected minks has a genetic mutation that might make the virus replicate better in mammal cells. The viruses from mink, and some viruses from birds, had additional mutations more commonly seen in human viruses.Antiviral susceptibility: Virus sequences from human cases, where available, did not show markers for resistance to neuraminidase inhibitors (such as oseltamivir) or endonuclease inhibitors (such as baloxavir). Sequences analyzed from circulating viruses in animal species contained only sporadic mutations which are associated with resistance to antivirals. Based on the available information human population immunity against the influenza A(H5) clade 2.3.4.4b virus haemagglutinin is expected to be minimal. More on this topic WHO assessment of risk associated with recent influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virusesOFFLU meeting to discuss avian influenza events in mammalsFAO Global consultation on Highly Pathogenic Avian InfluenzaWOAH Animal Health Forum on avian influenzaWHO Factsheet on avian and other zoonotic influenza,WHO Q&A on avian influenzaWOAH Infographic on the new dynamics of avian influenza EFSA Journal Scientific report Avian influenza overview December 2022–March 2023Eurosurveillance Journal Highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection in farmed minksEurosurveillance Journal Letter to the editor: Highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) viruses in farmed mink outbreak contain a disrupted second sialic acid binding site in neuraminidase, similar to human influenza A viruses Contact FAO News and MediaWHO Media TeamWOAH Media Inquiries WeChat Follow us on FAO Organizational Chart Worldwide offices Regional Office for Africa Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean Regional Office for the Near East and North Africa Country Offices Jobs Contact us Terms and Conditions Data protection and privacy Scam Alert Report Misconduct Transparency and accountability © FAO 2024Influenza Vaccination Could Reduce Hospitalization for RSV NewsAll NewsPress ReleasesProduct Approvals and LaunchesVideoAll Video TypesAJMC TVInsightsOnLocationPayer PerspectivesPeer ExchangePost Conference PerspectivesStakeholder SummitPodcastsConferencesConference CoverageConference ListingPost Conference PerspectivesJournalsAll JournalsThe American Journal of Managed CarePopulation Health, Equity & OutcomesEvidence-Based OncologyAbout Supplements and Featured PublicationsSupplements and Featured Publications IssuesSubmit a ManuscriptEventsInstitute for Value-Based MedicinePatient-Centered Oncology CareResourcesInteractive ToolsClinical SpotlightMicrositesSponsored ContentCEAbout AJMCAJMC StaffAnniversarySeema Sonnad AwardStrategic Alliance PartnersSubscribeSpecialty AreaBiosimilarsCardiorenalmetabolicCardiovascularChronic Kidney DiseaseDiabetesHeart FailureType 1 DiabetesDermatologyAlopeciaAtopic DermatitisPsoriasisHematologyALL/AMLCLL/SLLGVHDHemophiliaMultiple MyelomaMyelodysplastic SyndromesMyeloproliferative NeoplasmsNon-Hodgkin LymphomaRare BloodHepatologyLiverImmunologyAutoimmuneInflammationLupusMyasthenia GravisInfectious DiseaseCOVID-19HIVRSVVaccinesMental HealthMajor Depressive DisorderSleepNeurologyDuchenne Muscular DystrophyEpilepsyMultiple SclerosisParkinson DiseaseObesityOncologyBreast CancerCholangiocarcinomaColorectal CancerImmuno-OncologyLiver CancerLung CancerNon–Small Cell Lung CancerOvarian CancerProstate CancerSkin CancerSoft Tissue SarcomaOphthalmologyPulmonologyCOPDPulmonary Arterial HypertensionRare DiseaseSpinal Muscular AtrophyRespiratoryAsthmaIdiopathic Pulmonary FibrosisRheumatologyWomen's HealthTopicsBiosimilarsCenter on Health Equity & AccessDigital HealthFormularyGene TherapyGuidelinesHealth Care CostHealth Care DeliveryInsurancePolicyPopulation HealthProduct Approvals and LaunchesTechnologyValue-Based CareSpotlightFree In-Person Regional Events Focused on Oncology and Population HealthSpecialty AreaBiosimilarsCardiorenalmetabolicCardiovascularChronic Kidney DiseaseDiabetesHeart FailureType 1 DiabetesDermatologyAlopeciaAtopic DermatitisPsoriasisHematologyALL/AMLCLL/SLLGVHDHemophiliaMultiple MyelomaMyelodysplastic SyndromesMyeloproliferative NeoplasmsNon-Hodgkin LymphomaRare BloodHepatologyLiverImmunologyAutoimmuneInflammationLupusMyasthenia GravisInfectious DiseaseCOVID-19HIVRSVVaccinesMental HealthMajor Depressive DisorderSleepNeurologyDuchenne Muscular DystrophyEpilepsyMultiple SclerosisParkinson DiseaseObesityOncologyBreast CancerCholangiocarcinomaColorectal CancerImmuno-OncologyLiver CancerLung CancerNon–Small Cell Lung CancerOvarian CancerProstate CancerSkin CancerSoft Tissue SarcomaOphthalmologyPulmonologyCOPDPulmonary Arterial HypertensionRare DiseaseSpinal Muscular AtrophyRespiratoryAsthmaIdiopathic Pulmonary FibrosisRheumatologyWomen's HealthTopicsBiosimilarsCenter on Health Equity & AccessDigital HealthFormularyGene TherapyGuidelinesHealth Care CostHealth Care DeliveryInsurancePolicyPopulation HealthProduct Approvals and LaunchesTechnologyValue-Based CareSpotlightNewsVideoPodcastsConferencesJournalsEventsResourcesCEAbout AJMCSubscribeAdvertisementArticleJuly 13, 2023Influenza Vaccination Could Reduce Hospitalization for RSVAuthor(s):Julia Bonavitacola A study from Western Australia found that the influenza vaccine has a possible protective effect against hospitalization for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).A vaccination for influenza could have protective qualities against infection of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), according to a study published in Vaccine. Nonspecific effects on the burden of disease have been found in vaccines in recent years. The present study's researchers aimed to assess vaccination for influenza affects hospitalizations due to RSV in children, as both viruses have cocirculated with other respiratory viruses.Longitudinal data for all children from Western Australia who were born between 2000 and 2012 were used for this study. Influenza vaccine uptake, hospitalizations, and microbiology testing records were collected from birth until age 7 years or December 31, 2013, whichever came first. Sociodemographic details for both parents and maternal medical history, labor, delivery, and infant health at birth were also included.The Australian Childhood Immunization Register was used to collect data on vaccination date, vaccine type, and dose number for children from birth to age 7 years. This register contains data on 99% of all Australian children. Hospital admissions and up to 21 discharge diagnosis fields were included in the hospitalization data.The outcome for this study was the annual hospitalizations for laboratory-confirmed RSV that occurred between January 2000 and December 2013, with primary exposure being the receipt of the annual influenza vaccine. All children aged 6 months to 5 years were eligible for a free vaccine in Western Australia starting in 2008.There were 360,994 children in the cohort, of which 6.4% (23,107) were Aboriginal and 12% (12,141) were positive for RSV. Children younger than 2 years made up 90% of hospitalizations for RSV; the highest rate of hospitalization was found in children younger than 6 months. Children with low socioeconomic backgrounds, those born preterm or with low birthweight, or those who were born to a mother who smoked while pregnant or was younger than 20 years had a higher risk of hospitalization for RSV.Vaccination coverage was highest in 2009 when 26% of children aged 6 months to 7 years had received their vaccination. Although the crude hospitalization rates for RSV in those who received their influenza vaccine was comparable with those who didn’t, there was a reduction in hospitalization rate from 2008 to 2013 when the state funded the preschool influenza vaccination policy.Hospitalization for RSV decreased when a child received their influenza vaccine. Rate reductions of 2.27 (95% CI, –3.26 to –1.28) per 1000 population was found in children younger than 2 years and 0.53 (95% CI, –1.04 to –0.02) per 1000 in children aged 2 to 7 years.The researchers concluded that the preschool-funded influenza vaccine program was able to reduce hospitalizations for RSV by 793 hospitalizations in children who are younger than 2 years and 400 hospitalizations in children aged 2 to 7 years from 2008 to 2013.Potential limitations on these findings include that correlation in error terms over time were not considered and the time-varying nature of hospitalization for RSV and seasonal influenza vaccination was not taken into account. The study also did not distinguish the different brands and strains of the influenza vaccine.The investigators concluded that there is a possible protective effect of the influenza vaccine on hospitalizations for RSV in children in Western Australia.ReferenceLe H, de Klerk N, Blyth CC, Gidding H, Fathima P, Moore HC. Non-specific benefit of seasonal influenza vaccine on respiratory syncytial virus-hospitalizations in children: an instrumental variable approach using population-based data. Vaccine. Published online July 6, 2023. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2023.06.085Related VideosRelated Content AdvertisementNovember 9th 2024Fexagratinib in MS Shows Promise for Human UseJared KaltwasserThe therapy reduced inflammation and appeared to slow disease progression in models, suggesting it could have similar impacts in humans.October 29th 2024Breaking the Cycle: The Importance of Early Intervention in Hidradenitis SuppurativaGiuliana GrossiPrompt care supports mental well-being, as hidradenitis suppurativa is often associated with depression and anxiety due to its physical and social challenges.November 8th 2024Sunvozertinib NDA Submitted to FDA for NSCLCChris RyanA new drug application (NDA) has been submitted to the FDA for sunvozertinib in pretreated EGFR exon 20–positive advanced non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).September 30th 2024Sustaining Compassionate Trauma Care Across CommunitiesMaggie L. ShawSeptember is National Recovery Month, and we are bringing you another limited-edition month-long podcast series with our Strategic Alliance Partner, UPMC Health Plan. In our final episode, we speak with Lyndra Bills, MD, and Shari Hutchison, MS. November 8th 2024Empowering Young Women in the Fight Against HIVMaggie L. ShawAs part of our coverage of the biennial AIDS conference from the International AIDS Society, we spoke with Madalitso Juwayeyi, program manager at FACT-Malawi, to learn more about her organization and how it strives to serve the sexual and reproductive health needs of adolescent girls and young women in her native Malawi.November 7th 2024Lessons Learned From Medicaid Unwinding as States Tackle Eligibility ChecksGiuliana GrossiMedicaid and CHIP enrollment surged from 71 million in February 2020 to 94 million by April 2023. However, with the pandemic emergency ending in May 2023, states resumed eligibility reviews, initiating a process termed “unwinding.” Related Content AdvertisementNovember 9th 2024Fexagratinib in MS Shows Promise for Human UseJared KaltwasserThe therapy reduced inflammation and appeared to slow disease progression in models, suggesting it could have similar impacts in humans.October 29th 2024Breaking the Cycle: The Importance of Early Intervention in Hidradenitis SuppurativaGiuliana GrossiPrompt care supports mental well-being, as hidradenitis suppurativa is often associated with depression and anxiety due to its physical and social challenges.November 8th 2024Sunvozertinib NDA Submitted to FDA for NSCLCChris RyanA new drug application (NDA) has been submitted to the FDA for sunvozertinib in pretreated EGFR exon 20–positive advanced non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).September 30th 2024Sustaining Compassionate Trauma Care Across CommunitiesMaggie L. ShawSeptember is National Recovery Month, and we are bringing you another limited-edition month-long podcast series with our Strategic Alliance Partner, UPMC Health Plan. In our final episode, we speak with Lyndra Bills, MD, and Shari Hutchison, MS. November 8th 2024Empowering Young Women in the Fight Against HIVMaggie L. ShawAs part of our coverage of the biennial AIDS conference from the International AIDS Society, we spoke with Madalitso Juwayeyi, program manager at FACT-Malawi, to learn more about her organization and how it strives to serve the sexual and reproductive health needs of adolescent girls and young women in her native Malawi.November 7th 2024Lessons Learned From Medicaid Unwinding as States Tackle Eligibility ChecksGiuliana GrossiMedicaid and CHIP enrollment surged from 71 million in February 2020 to 94 million by April 2023. However, with the pandemic emergency ending in May 2023, states resumed eligibility reviews, initiating a process termed “unwinding.” 2 Commerce DriveSuite 100Cranbury, NJ 08512 © 2024 MJH Life Sciences® and AJMC®. All rights reserved.AboutContactEditorial BoardsAdvertiseDo Not Sell My InformationTerms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySouthern Hemisphere flu activity rises; Central America reports hot spots | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu Southern Hemisphere flu activity rises; Central America reports hot spots News brief Lisa Schnirring Topics Influenza, General Share Copied to clipboard NIAID Southern Hemisphere flu activity continues to rise in some countries, though levels have stabilized or are declining in others, the World Health Organization (WHO) said in its latest update, which covers roughly the middle 2 weeks of June. Australia's flu detections rose over that period, with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) activity also elevated. New Zealand's flu activity remains low, though levels are rising in some of the Pacific islands. South Africa's flu activity appears to have peaked at a high level in early June. Flu declined in South America's temperate countries, the WHO said, and illness levels were reported as low in the region's tropical countries. Some Central American countries reported increased flu levels, with Costa Rica reporting extraordinary levels, Honduras reporting high activity, and Nicaragua and Panama reporting moderate activity. Mexico's flu activity is higher than expected for this time of year. In tropical Asia, Bangladesh reported a slight increase. Of respiratory samples that tested positive for flu at national labs during the reporting period, 67.4% were influenza A, and, of the subtyped samples, 74.3% were the 2009 H1N1 virus. All characterized influenza B viruses belonged to the Victoria lineage. GAO releases recommendations aimed at future pandemics News brief Stephanie Soucheray, MA Topics Business Preparedness COVID-19 Pandemic Influenza Public Health The US Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report on key COVID-19 findings and recommendations, with the aim of helping federal agencies better prepare for future emergencies, according to a GAO press release. The report is a continuation of the GAO's series on the accountability and effectiveness of the federal government's $4.7 trillion pandemic response since 2020. The current report focuses on lessons learned from April 2022 through April 2023. Experts looked at five key areas, including public health preparedness, fraud, vulnerable populations, distribution of COVID funding, and the pandemic's impact on the US economy. About 45% of [GAO recommendations] have been fully or partially addressed. "As of April 2023, we've made 386 recommendations to 26 federal agencies and 19 suggestions to Congress to strengthen response and preparedness. About 45% of those have been fully or partially addressed," the GAO writes. Heightened risk of fraud Of note, the GAO said more federal stopgaps and surveillance measures for fraud must be taken into account as the US plans for the next pandemic. "As federal agencies sought to expedite payments to individuals and businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, agencies used some processes that GAO has previously reported can increase fraud risk,” the authors of the report wrote. The Department of Labor, in particular, has yet to create an antifraud taskforce to address unemployment insurance, something the GAO recommended in December 2022. The GAO also said the Department of Health and Human Services failed to update its procedures for Strategic National Stockpile inventory planning reviews and manage risks associated with inventory gaps, something that has also been recommended since 2022. Melinta to seek approval of 2 antibiotics for use in kids, against biothreats News brief Chris Dall, MA Topics Antimicrobial Stewardship Bioterrorism Drugmaker Melinta Therapeutics announced yesterday that it will receive funding from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) to advance two antibiotics targeting multidrug-resistant infections for use in children. The two antibiotics, Baxdela (delafloxacin) and Vabomere (meropenem and vaborbactam) are already approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in adults. Baxdela is used to treat acute bacterial skin and skin-structure infections and community-acquired bacterial pneumonia (CABP), and Vabomere is designed for gram-negative pathogens that produce beta-lactamase enzymes. The $20.5 million base funding from BARDA will support plans to extend Baxdela's CABP indication to children aged 2 months to less than 18 years and Vabomere's use for complicated urinary tract infections to children aged 3 months to less than 18 years. Melinta will also use the funding to seek approval for using Vabomere to treat late-onset neonatal sepsis in infants aged less than 90 days and for Baxdela as a potential treatment option against biothreat pathogens in children and adults. We are poised to make a lasting impact in healthcare. The company will submit four supplemental New Drug Applications to the FDA for these new indications. Under the contract, Melinta could receive an additional $121.4 million from BARDA if all options are exercised. "This contract fuels our excitement to explore expanded applications of Baxdela and Vabomere through innovative research," Melinta President and CEO Christine Ann Miller said in a company press release. "We are poised to make a lasting impact in healthcare, unlocking new avenues for patient care and addressing unmet needs." England's National Health Service expands novel payment model for antibiotics News brief Chris Dall, MA Topics Antimicrobial Stewardship Oleksandr Siedov / iStock England's National Health Service (NHS) announced yesterday that it is expanding its subscription-style payment model for antibiotics. Under a pilot program launched in June 2022, NHS England awarded subscription contracts of up to £10 million a year (US $12.9 million) for 10 years for access to cefiderocol and ceftazidime-avibactam, manufactured by Shionogi and Pfizer, respectively. The idea behind the program was to provide the companies with a fixed annual fee based on the value of the antibiotics to the NHS and patients, rather than the volumes sold, and remove any incentive to overuse the drugs while incentivizing companies to develop new antibiotics. With the proposed expansion of the program, the annual contracts could double to £20 million (US $25.9 million), based on criteria developed by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, and all UK nations will have access to the antibiotics. The development of new antibiotics is absolutely essential to help build resilience to respond rapidly to new superbugs and save lives. "As we continue to take lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic, the development of new antibiotics is absolutely essential to help build resilience to respond rapidly to new superbugs and save lives," David Glover, NHS assistant director of medicines analysis, said in an NHS press release. "With the proposed expansion of our world-first subscription model following a successful pilot, we want to meet this challenge head on and lead the response to the global battle against antimicrobial resistance, which could undermine the ability to deliver routine hospital care and treatment for patients." A 12-week consultation will seek input from the pharmaceutical industry, patients, healthcare providers, and academics. Proposals will prioritize products that are active against pathogens deemed by the World Health Organization to be the most urgent threats. Quick takes: Dengue vax pulled from FDA review, mpox in Trinidad & Tobago, US West Nile cases News brief Lisa Schnirring Topics Dengue Mpox West Nile Takeda yesterday announced that it voluntarily withdrew its Food and Drug Administration (FDA) licensing application for its dengue vaccine candidate because of issues with data collection that can't be resolved during the current review cycle. The company said it would further evaluate the plan for the vaccine, given the need to protect travelers and those living in dengue-endemic areas of the United States, such as Puerto Rico. The vaccine is already approved in several endemic and non-endemic countries. Currently, the only FDA-approved dengue vaccine is GSK's Dengvaxia, which is indicated only for children ages 6 to 16 who have evidence of previous infection and live in endemic areas. Trinidad and Tobago's health minister yesterday reported the country's first mpox case, which involves a middle-aged man who has a travel history, according to a local media report. Contact tracing is under way, and health officials are planning a vaccination push. The World Health Organization in its latest update on the current global outbreak said 88,288 cases, 149 of them fatal, have been reported in 112 countries. Ten states have reported 36 human West Nile virus (WNV) cases this year, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in its latest update, which notes that levels of the mosquito-borne illness rise in the summer and continue into fall and can fluctuate by year. Arizona has the most cases, with 25 reported to date. So far, 23 neuroinvasive infections have been reported. In a related development, the Texas Department of State Health Services yesterday reported its first human WNV case of the year, in a resident of Dallas County who was diagnosed as having neuroinvasive disease. ALL BRIEFS In case you missed it Previous Next Last patient discharged from treatment in Rwanda’s Marburg outbreak WHO: mpox plateaus in a DRC hot spot, rises in other African countries Arkansas, Montana report CWD infections in deer, elk Africa CDC launches trial of smallpox drug for mpox CDC reports slight flu rise in children, first kid's flu death of season CDC tracks rise in pertussis activity Quick takes: Polio in 7 countries, lab monkey escape, pneumonic tularemia in Colorado Surveillance turns up 18 previously undetected cases of tick-borne Yezo virus in China This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring WHO unveils priority pathogen list for urgent vaccine development The report also spotlights the urgency of vaccines for pathogens such as group A Streptococcus and Klebsiella pneumoniae, which are increasingly resistant to antimicrobials. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateUSDA ERS - Chart Detail Skip to navigation Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( LockA locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Economic Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Menu Home Topics Topics Animal Products Crops Farm Bill Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Data Products Data Products View by Topic: Animal Products Crops Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Publications Publications View by Topic: Animal Products Crops Farm Economy Farm Practices & Management Food & Nutrition Assistance Food Choices & Health Food Markets & Prices Food Safety International Markets & U.S. Trade Natural Resources & Environment Rural Economy & Population Newsroom Newsroom Contact ERS Press Office Trending Topics Multimedia Calendar Calendar Today's Releases This Month's Releases Next Month's Releases Amber Waves Magazine Amber Waves Magazine Amber Waves Home All Articles About ERS Careers at ERS FAQs Contact Us Search small Search Home Data Products Chart Gallery Chart Detail Wholesale egg prices tumble as egg supplies recover Wholesale egg prices reached record highs in 2022 after avian flu resulted in significant reductions in egg-laying flocks. Avian flu, also known as highly pathogenic avian influenza, is a disease that spreads rapidly in birds and poultry and is often lethal. Cumulative losses attributable to the disease amounted to more than 43 million egg-laying hens. At the height of the disease, in the last weeks of December 2022, weekly egg inventories were 29 percent lower than at the beginning of the year, and prices reached a high of $5.37 per dozen. With no new outbreaks reported in 2023, the size of the egg-laying flock has gradually increased since late 2022, and egg inventories have been steadily recovering. In turn, wholesale prices have fallen sharply, reaching $0.89 per dozen in the first week of May 2023 after a seasonal increase in the weeks leading up to Easter. As of the week ending June 30, 2023, egg inventories were about 24 percent higher than the lowest 2022 values. During the same week, the average price was $1.23 per dozen, about 77 percent lower than the highest average weekly price in 2022. During the summer months, demand for eggs tends to level off as people bake less often. As a result, minimal fluctuation in wholesale egg prices is expected during this period. This chart is drawn from the USDA, Economic Research Service (ERS) Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook, June 2023. See also the ERS Chart of Note, Avian influenza outbreaks reduced egg production, driving prices to record highs in 2022, published in January 2023. Embed this chart Download larger size chart (2048 pixels by 1597, 96 dpi) Related Data Livestock and Meat Domestic Data Related Reports Livestock, Dairy, and Poultry Outlook: June 2023 Gallery Related Topics Animal Products Poultry & Eggs Last updated: Tuesday, July 11, 2023 For more information, contact: Adriana Valcu-Lisman Return to top ERS Links ERS Home Accessibility Careers Contact Us E-Mail Updates Help Information Quality Site Map Privacy Policy & Non-Discrimination Statement USDA Links FOIA Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Hotline Inspector General Plain Writing USDA.gov USA.gov WhiteHouse.gov Sign Up for Updates Subscribe Economic Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture Please enable JavaScript to signup for an api.data.gov API key.Memory-like innate response to booster vaccination with MF-59 adjuvanted influenza vaccine in children | npj Vaccines Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature npj vaccines articles article Memory-like innate response to booster vaccination with MF-59 adjuvanted influenza vaccine in children Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 13 July 2023 Memory-like innate response to booster vaccination with MF-59 adjuvanted influenza vaccine in children Dmitri Kazmin1 na1, Elizabeth A. Clutterbuck2 na1, Giorgio Napolitani3 na1, Amanda L. Wilkins2,4 na1, Andrea Tarlton3, Amber J. Thompson2, Emmanuele Montomoli5 nAff11, Guilia Lapini5, Smiti Bihari2, Rachel White2, Claire Jones2, Matthew D. Snape2, Ushma Galal6, Ly-Mee Yu6, Rino Rappuoli7 nAff12, Giuseppe Del Giudice7, Andrew J. Pollard ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-7361-719X2 & …Bali Pulendran ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6517-43331,8,9,10 Show authors npj Vaccines volume 8, Article number: 100 (2023) Cite this article 2159 Accesses 2 Citations 1 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects AdjuvantsProtein vaccines AbstractThe pediatric population receives the majority of vaccines globally, yet there is a paucity of studies on the transcriptional response induced by immunization in this special population. In this study, we performed a systems-level analysis of immune responses to the trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine adjuvanted with MF-59 in children (15–24 months old) and in young, healthy adults. We analyzed transcriptional responses elicited by vaccination in peripheral blood, as well as cellular and antibody responses following primary and booster vaccinations. Our analysis revealed that primary vaccination induced a persistent transcriptional signature of innate immunity; booster vaccination induced a transcriptional signature of an enhanced memory-like innate response, which was consistent with enhanced activation of myeloid cells assessed by flow cytometry. Furthermore, we identified a transcriptional signature of type 1 interferon response post-booster vaccination and at baseline that was correlated with the local reactogenicity to vaccination and defined an early signature that correlated with the hemagglutinin antibody titers. These results highlight an adaptive behavior of the innate immune system in evoking a memory-like response to secondary vaccination and define molecular correlates of reactogenicity and immunogenicity in infants. Similar content being viewed by others A molecular atlas of innate immunity to adjuvanted and live attenuated vaccines, in mice Article Open access 27 January 2022 Systems vaccinology of the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine in humans Article 12 July 2021 Transcriptional atlas of the human immune response to 13 vaccines reveals a common predictor of vaccine-induced antibody responses Article 31 October 2022 IntroductionSeasonal influenza carries a significant health burden for young children1,2. Routine vaccination is used in some pediatric populations; however, the trivalent inactivated vaccine (TIV) has been shown to afford variable protection rates in infants and adults3. An oil-in-water adjuvant MF-59 is approved for use with TIV vaccine in adult populations and for children 6 months to 2 years of age in Canada. Adjuvanted TIV (ATIV) has been demonstrated to elicit stronger humoral response4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 and to be more efficacious in early childhood than TIV12,13. The antibody response elicited by MF59-adjuvanted TIV vaccine is characterized by a higher magnitude and broader specificity than that induced by non-adjuvanted TIV14, and is mediated by a larger expansion of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells14. The increased efficacy and immunogenicity of MF59-adjuvanted vaccine may be explained by its positive effect on the recruitment of immune cells to the site of injection, higher antigen uptake by antigen-presenting cells, and more efficient priming of CD4+ T cells in draining lymph nodes, resulting in better antibody responses15. In addition, MF59 has been shown to boost innate and adaptive immune responses16, through a mechanism independent of the type 1 interferon signaling pathway17. MF59 also induces expression of multiple factors involved in immune cell recruitment from blood into the peripheral tissue16,17,18, and promotes differentiation of monocytes into immature dendritic cells18,19, resulting in increased antigen uptake and enhanced presentation18,19.Systems immunology approaches have been used to understand the molecular mechanisms leading to the development of effective immune responses to a diverse spectrum of vaccines20, including yellow fever21,22, meningococcal vaccines23, shingles vaccines24,25, malarial vaccines26,27, mRNA vaccines28, and seasonal influenza vaccines in adult29,30,31,32,33 and in pediatric6,34 populations. Here we report the findings from a clinical study in which responses to MF59-adjuvanted TIV vaccine were compared between children (15–24 months old) and healthy young adults. This study was designed as a follow-up to a previous study, in which the responses to adjuvanted and non-adjuvanted TIV vaccines were studied in a pediatric population6. In that study, we observed that MF59-adjuvanted vaccine elicited a stronger transcriptional response in peripheral blood and was more immunogenic than the non-adjuvanted vaccine in terms of serological responses6. We also observed that the temporal dynamics of transcriptional responses in the peripheral blood of toddlers was altered by the addition of the MF59 adjuvant, making the responses more uniform across subjects and more similar to the time course of responses observed in adults immunized with TIV6. Therefore, this study was designed to address the following questions: first, what are the kinetics of transcriptional correlates of immunogenicity in young children following the prime and the boost immunizations with MF59-adjuvanted TIV vaccine; second, how do the responses to MF59-adjuvanted TIV compare between age groups; and, third, how do the responses to adjuvanted TIV in adults compare with those observed in multiple previous studies with non-adjuvanted TIV. We performed transcriptional profiling of the peripheral blood at various time points post prime and boost vaccinations, measured the gains in hemagglutinin inhibition (HAI) titers following the vaccination, and accessed cellular responses as they developed post prime and boost vaccinations. The data presented in this manuscript uncover the complex temporal dynamics of responses to adjuvanted TIV vaccine and shed light on the mechanism of action of MF59 adjuvant in infant and adult populations.ResultsStudy designThe protocol for this study, NCT02529904, was ethically approved by NRES Committee South Central-Hampshire A, United Kingdom. Ninety children, aged 15–24 months, were randomized into three cohorts. Each participant received two doses of seasonal TIV vaccine with MF59 adjuvant, 28 days apart. Peripheral blood was collected as indicated in Fig. 1a. Due to the limitations on the number of blood draws that could be obtained from a child, we utilized a staggered sample collection design. Pre-vaccination baseline samples were obtained from individuals in cohort A. Pre-boost baseline samples were obtained from those in cohorts B and C. Children in Cohort A were sampled also at day 1 post primary vaccination. Children in cohorts B and C were sampled at day 1 and day 3 post boost vaccination, respectively. Blood was also collected from all subjects 28 days after the boost vaccination to access the serological responses. Thirty young (25–40 years of age) healthy adult volunteers (cohort D) received a single ATIV injection, and blood was collected from all adult subjects prior to vaccination and at days 1, 3, and 28 post vaccination (Fig. 1a).Fig. 1: Study outline and serological responses.a Study outline. Ninety children, 15–24 months old, were randomized into three cohorts, A, B, and C, illustrated in blue color. Each infant received two injections of MF59-adjuvanted trivalent inactivated seasonal influenza vaccine, 28 days apart. Blood was sampled from each infant at three time points. Each infant from all three cohorts was sampled at day 56 of the study for the measurement of HAI titers. In addition, children in Cohort A were sampled at the pre-vaccination baseline (day −7 to day 0 of the study) and day 1 post prime vaccination. Children in Cohort B were sampled at day 28 (pre-boost baseline) and day 29 (1 day post boost vaccination). Children in Cohort C were sampled at day 28 and day 31 (pre-boost baseline and day 3 post boost vaccination, respectively). HAI titers were measured in all samples. Immunoprofiling of responding cellular subsets and transcriptional analysis was performed at the pre-vaccination baseline (Cohort A), day 1 post prime (Cohort A), Pre-boost baseline (Cohorts B and C), day 1 post boost (Cohort B) and day 3 post boost (Cohort C). In addition, 30 young (age 25–40 years) healthy adult volunteers received a single dose of the same vaccine (Cohort D, illustrated in orange color). Blood was sampled from all adult volunteers at the pre-vaccination baseline (day 28), day 29, and day 31 of the study (days 1 and 3 post vaccination), and day 56 of the study. HAI titers were measured at all time points, and immunoprofiling of responding cellular subsets and transcriptional analysis was performed at the baseline and days 1 and 3 post vaccination. b Serological responses. The changes in HAI titers against each one of the vaccine strains: H1N1 (A/California), H3N2 (A/Switzerland) and B (B/Phuket) are illustrated in each column. Each row corresponds to one of the four cohorts of the study. Each line represents a subject; bold lines represent mean changes in HAI titers across all subjects in a cohort.Full size imageReactogenicity and adverse effectsWe assessed adverse effects on the day of injection and up to 3 days post vaccination. The ATIV vaccine was well tolerated, with no increase in irritability or fever among recipients in response to the primary vaccination, and a mild increase in irritability following the boost vaccination. Following the primary vaccination, the most common adverse effects were mild redness (19/90 or 21% of children), swelling (4/90, or 4.4%) and mild pain (29% of children). Redness and swelling were most observed either on the day of vaccination (day 0) or day 1 post primary vaccination, and in some cases lasted for more than 2 days (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Fever was not observed following the primary vaccination in children (Supplementary Fig. 1B). Following the boost, 24 out of 83 toddlers (29%) displayed mild redness, and 5 (6%)—mild swelling (Supplementary Fig. 1C). Swelling and redness commonly co-occurred in the same subjects (Supplementary Fig. 1). Additionally, 4% of children exhibited moderate pain, with a duration of 2 days or less (not shown). Five out of 83 (6%) child participants exhibited fever in response to the boost vaccination on the day of injection, which in two cases lasted for more than two days (Supplementary Fig. 1D). Among the adult participants 5/31 (16%) exhibited redness and 3/31 (10%)—swelling, which in some cases occurred in the same subjects (Supplementary Fig. 2A). Fever in response to vaccination was not observed among the adult participants (Supplementary Fig. 2B).Serological responsesVaccine-specific antibody responses were assessed by hemagglutinin inhibition (HAI) assay. The results are illustrated in Fig. 1b. Both H1N1 (A/California) and H3N2 (A/Switzerland) strains proved to be equally immunogenic, and the resulting HAI titers at day 56 were not significantly different among the cohorts. Among children, we found greater prevalence of immunologically experienced subjects with respect to H3N2 strain (13/24) at baseline, compared with H1N1 (4/24). Most toddlers were naïve to the B strain (B/Phuket), which also was less immunogenic than the A strains. For children in cohort A seroconversion (4-fold increase in HAI titers) was achieved for 23/24 subjects for the H1N1 strain (A/California), 22/24 subjects for the H3N2 strain (A/Switzerland) and for 19/24 subjects for the B/Phuket strain. Seroprotection, as indicated by the HAI titer 1:629, estimated to correspond to a 90% protection rate35, was achieved for 6/24 subjects for the H1N1 strain, 20/24 subjects for the H3N2 strain, and no subjects achieved the HAI titer of 1:629 for the B/Phuket strain (Supplementary Fig. 3A). For the adults, seroconversion was achieved for 19/28 subjects for the H1N1 strain, 25/28 subjects for the H3N2 strain, and for 15/28 subjects for the B strain. Seroprotection (HAI titers of greater than 1:40) was achieved for all adult subjects for both A strains, and for 16/28 subjects for the B/Phuket strain (Supplementary Fig. 3B). The maximum gain in HAI titers (fold-change of day 56 to day 0) across all three vaccine strains was more likely to be achieved against the strain for which a subject was naïve at the baseline (Supplementary Fig. 3), consistent with the patterns shown in Fig. 1b.Transcriptional responsesWe observed robust transcriptional responses in peripheral blood at day 1 post prime and post boost in toddlers. Post-boost responses were generally stronger, with a total of 221 genes passing the significance cutoffs (FDR < 0.05 and fold-change relative to baseline greater than 1.5-fold). Day 3 responses were very weak, consistent with the previously observed trend6 (Fig. 2a). Responses in adults were stronger than in children, with a total of 678 up- or down-regulated genes satisfying the significance criteria. Similar to the responses observed in young children, responses at day 3 in adults were very weak, with no significant genes detected (Fig. 2a). Among the upregulated genes, out of 74 probe sets significantly upregulated at D1 in children, 35 were found to be also upregulated at D29, while 39 were unique to D1 (Fig. 2b, c). The 35 probe sets (reporting on 23 unique named genes) that are upregulated at both D1 and D29 are significantly enriched in Reactome pathways relevant to interferon signaling, such as interferon gamma signaling (FDR = 8.8×10–9) and interferon signaling (FDR = 3.38×10–7). The 39 probe sets unique to D1 (the red cluster in Fig. 2c) were not significantly enriched in any immunologically relevant pathway. The majority of genes upregulated at D1 or D29 in children were also upregulated in adults (Fig. 2b, c), and with greater magnitude (Fig. 2c), and the 620 probe sets upregulated in adults were strongly enriched in the interferon signaling pathway (FDR = 1.98×10–12). Many genes whose expression was induced at D1 post prime vaccination were also induced at D1 post boost (D29), but to a greater magnitude (Fig. 2d). Reactome pathway overrepresentation analysis indicated that these genes are strongly enriched in interferon signaling pathways (Fig. 2f). In contrast, genes whose upregulation at D29 was less than upregulation at D1 (Fig. 2e) were not enriched in any immunologically relevant pathway (data not shown). Functional responses to vaccination were assessed by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using blood transcriptional modules (BTMs)23. We observed strong activation of multiple modules relevant to innate immunity at days 1 post prime and post boost vaccination in children, which diminished at day 3 post boost (Fig. 3). These include modules in interferon/antiviral sensing, antigen presentation, DC activation, inflammatory/TLR/chemokines, monocytes and neutrophils groups. In contrast, NK cell modules were strongly suppressed at day 1 post prime and day 1 post boost. Cell cycle modules were strongly upregulated at day 3 post boost. Among the modules relevant to the adaptive immunity, we observed strong suppression of B cell modules and plasma cell modules at all time points, and strong suppression of multiple T cell modules at day 1 post prime and day 1 post boost. This suppression was only partially relieved at day 3 post boost in children (Fig. 3). Transcriptional responses in adults generally mirrored those observed in children. One notable difference was the reversal of suppression of T cell modules at day 3 post vaccination. At day 3 post boost in children these modules continue to be suppressed, while in adults we observed a mild (statistically insignificant) upregulation (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 4).Fig. 2: Transcriptional responses at gene level.a Volcano plots representing the quantitative transcriptional changes in peripheral blood occurring post vaccination. Each dot represents a probe set. X axis represents the log2 of the fold-change in gene expression relative to the corresponding baseline, Y axis represents -1*log10 of the corresponding p value (paired t test). Vertical red dashed lines are drawn at 1.5-fold change in gene expression. Horizontal red dashed lines are drawn at the p value corresponding to the FDR Q value of 0.05. Numbers represent the number of probe sets passing the above significance criteria. b A Venn diagram indicating overlaps among probe sets induced at day 1 post prime (D1), day 1 post boost (D29) in children and day 1 post injection in adults. c A heatmap illustrating patterns of regulation of all probe sets induced at D1 and D29 in children and D1 in adults. Fold-change values were standardized by row (z-score transformation). d Fold changes of genes with greater upregulation at D29 than at D1. For this plot, 39 probe sets that are upregulated at D29 by 2-fold more than they are upregulated at D1 were selected. e Fold changes of genes with lesser upregulation at D29 than at D1. For this plot, 30 probe sets that are upregulated at D29 by 2-fold less than they are upregulated at D1 were selected. f Reactome pathway enrichment of 39 probe sets shown in panel D. These are the genes that are upregulated more strongly in response to the secondary vaccination compared to the primary.Full size imageFig. 3: Transcriptional responses at module level.a Qualitative analysis of changes in gene expression by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Each row represents a gene module, each column—a time point. Color represents the normalized enrichment score. Modules are grouped according to the high level annotation category, as indicated by the legend on the left of the heatmap. All modules are shown, regardless of the statistical significance of enrichment. b Same as (a), showing only modules with statistically significant (FDR < 0.05) enrichment. Non-significant modules are shown as blank.Full size imageTranscriptional signatures at baselines prior to primary and booster vaccinationsDirect comparison of pre-prime and pre-boost baselines yielded no significantly up- or down-regulated genes at day 28 compared with day 0 (Fig. 4a). However, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)36 performed on lists of genes ranked by the relative fold-change in expression at day 28 compared with day 0, indicated that many gene modules relevant to adaptive responses (T cell and plasma cell modules), as well as NK cell modules, appear to be more strongly expressed at day 0 compared with day 28, indicating their suppression at the pre-boost baseline (Fig. 4a, b). In contrast, many modules relevant to the innate responses were positively enriched at day 28 baseline, indicating continuous activation of innate responses between the pre-prime and pre-boost time point (day 28 vs day 0) (Fig. 4a, b). We performed a leading-edge analysis of innate immunity modules with significant positive enrichment at the pre-boost baseline and traced the activation pattern of these genes across the timeline of this study. K-means clustering of expression patterns of these genes indicated several distinct patterns. One cluster (indicated in red on the line plot in Fig. 4a) contained genes, whose expression is induced at day 1 post prime, and does not return to baseline 28 days after the first vaccination. After the boost injection, these genes are induced again, and in many cases, to a greater magnitude than at day 1 post prime (Fig. 4a). Reactome pathway analysis of genes within this cluster revealed strong enrichment of interferon signaling and antiviral response pathways (Fig. 4a, bottom).Fig. 4: Comparison of pre-prime (Cohort A) and pre-boosts (Cohorts B and C) baselines.a Volcano plot is as described above. No probe sets passed the FDR < 0.05 filter. Panels on the left and right of the volcano plot illustrate the enrichment of select gene sets in the list of genes ordered by the difference in gene expression at day 28 (visit 4, pre-boost baseline) compared to day 0 (pre-vaccination baseline). Genes were ranked according to the fold-change between the D28 and D0 baselines and GSEA was performed on the ranked gene list, followed by the leading edge analysis to identify genes, whose expression is most strongly perturbed between the two baselines. Expression of the leading edge genes were analyzed by k-means clustering (k = 3), The cluster of genes that are upregulated at D1, D28 and D29 is highlighted in red in the line plot. Reactome pathway enrichment analysis was performed on genes within this cluster, and illustrated on the bottom panel. b Representative enriched modules from the GSEA analysis of the ranked list of genes.Full size imageTranscriptional correlates of reactogenicityWe investigated the transcriptional and cellular correlates of vaccine reactogenicity, as measured by fever, redness and swelling, in toddlers and adults. Appearance of redness and/or swelling at the site of the injection of any measurable size (>1 mm) was considered an adverse effect. For fever, an increase of body temperature post vaccination by more than 0.5 °C compared to the pre-vaccination baseline, combined with measured temperature post vaccination of greater than 37 °C was considered an adverse effect. We found no transcriptional or cellular correlates of fever. However, we identified a large set of genes, whose expression levels after the secondary vaccination relative to the pre-boost baseline discriminates toddlers who displayed early onset of erythema (1–24 h) from those who did not (Fig. 5a). When we investigated pathway enrichment in this set of genes using Reactome database (www.reactome.org), we noted a strong prevalence of multiple pathways relevant to interferon response (Fig. 5b). Likewise, we identified multiple interferon response pathways as enriched among the genes that are more strongly upregulated in toddlers, who displayed an early onset of swelling at the site of injection following the secondary vaccination, compared to toddlers that did not display swelling (Supplementary Fig. 5A). Thus, we identified an elevated interferon response to the boost vaccination in peripheral blood as a correlate of early onset of local reactogenicity in toddlers. We did not observe a consistent pattern of transcriptional correlates of local reactogenicity in toddlers following the prime vaccination. In adults, we did not observe transcriptional correlates of early onset of erythema; however, we did observe that elevated expression of multiple genes, relevant to interferon response in adults subjects that displayed an early onset of swelling (Supplementary Fig. 5B). Finally, we also observed that multiple interferon response pathways are enriched among the genes more highly expressed in adults that displayed a late (24–72 h) onset of erythema (Supplementary Fig. 5C). Taken together, these data allow us to conclude that systemic upregulation of interferon response, observed in peripheral blood, is a hallmark of concomitant local reactogenicity of the vaccine, but not of systemic response, such as fever.Fig. 5: Transcriptional correlates of reactogenicity.a A heatmap showing genes, whose expression tracks with early onset of erythema in toddlers post secondary vaccination. Genes were selected as having baseline-normalized expression level in responders more than 2-fold higher than in non-responders. Early onset is defined as erythema larger than 1 mm observed no later than 24 h post injection. b Reactome pathway analysis of the genes presented in (a), horizontal axis represents -log10(FDR) for enrichment of a given pathway. Only pathways that are statistically significantly enriched are shown. Significant enrichment is defined as FDR < 0.05. c Baseline correlates of reactogenicity in children and adults, as defined by gene set enrichment analysis. Red color of circles indicates positive correlation with the occurrence of adverse effects, size indicates the absolute value of the normalized enrichment score (ABS.NES).Full size imageWe then investigated whether there are transcriptional features existing at the baseline (prior to vaccination) that track with increased reactogenicity post vaccination. We found that multiple modules related to interferon signaling and monocytes represent positive baseline correlates of immediate (the day of vaccination) and early (day 1 post vaccination) onset of erythema post prime vaccination in children, but not in adults (Fig. 5c). These data demonstrate that activation of interferon response-related modules at baseline pre-vaccination is a marker of vaccine reactogenicity post vaccination.Transcriptional correlates of immunogenicityWe have utilized GSEA in combination with correlation analysis to identify gene modules whose up- or down-regulation most strongly correlates with the downstream accumulation of vaccine-specific antibodies (Fig. 6a). We have observed that the induction of multiple innate immunity gene modules involved in antigen presentation pathways, DC activation, monocytes, inflammatory/TLR/chemokines, at day 1 post primary vaccination, were positively correlated with downstream HAI titers (Supplementary Fig. 6A), although for most of these modules the enrichment did not reach statistical significance (Fig. 6b). At the same time, most adaptive immunity modules, including cell cycle and T cell modules, at day 1 post prime, were negatively associated with HAI titers (Fig. 6c and Supplementary Fig. 6B). Transcriptional correlates of HAI responses at D1 post boost (D29 of the study) were very different from those correlates observed at D1 post prime. These correlates included negative association of several innate immunity modules (Fig. 6b), while multiple T cell modules and cell cycle modules showed significant positive association with downstream serological responses (Fig. 6c). At day 3 post boost very few significant associations were observed in children (Fig. 6b, c). Transcriptional correlates of immunogenicity in adults at day 1 were weak and mostly included negative correlations for innate immunity modules, like the correlates observed at day 29 in children (Fig. 6b). Positive association of T cell modules, observed in children at day 1 post boost was not observed in adults at day 1 (Fig. 6c). However, correlates observed in adults at day 3 post vaccination are strikingly similar to the correlates observed in children at day 1 post boost, with negative associations of multiple innate immunity modules, and positive correlations observed for T cell modules and NK cell modules (Fig. 6b–d and Supplementary Fig. 6A, B).Fig. 6: Transcriptional correlates of antibody responses.a The schematic of the methods used to generate the transcriptional correlates of immunogenicity. For each gene correlation with HAI titers was calculated, and genes were ranked based on the correlation coefficients. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed on the ranked list of genes and the enrichment scores for each gene modules were plotted in (b, c). b, c Significantly enriched modules from the innate immunity (b) and adaptive immunity (c) groups. Each row represents a module. Non-significantly (FDR > 0.05) enriched modules are shown as blank. d Scatterplot illustrating the similarity between the correlates of HAI responses for children at D29 and adults at D3. Each dot represents a module.Full size imageEnhanced activation of myeloid cells following booster vaccinationThe transcriptional analysis described here and in the previous study6 suggest a correlation between multiple innate immunity transcriptional modules and antibody responses. To confirm and extend this observation, we determined if these transcriptional signatures were associated with changes in the frequency and the activation profile of distinct myeloid cell populations. Thus, we analyzed multicolor flow cytometry data generated from the analysis of fresh blood samples collected over the course of the study, and quantified neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, CD1c+ myeloid cDC2, CD141+ myeloid cDC1, CD123+ plasmаcytoid DCs, as well as classical (CD14highCD16-), intermediate (CD14highCD16+) and non-classical (CD14lowCD16high) monocytes. The gating strategy is presented in Supplementary Fig. 7. Among monocyte subpopulations, only classical CD14highCD16- monocytes showed a slight increase at day 3 post boost (data not shown). We observed, however, a strong and significant increase in the expression of the activation marker CD40 on all monocyte subsets at days 1 and 3 post boost, as well as at day 1 post prime (CD14highCD16+ intermediate monocytes only) (Fig. 7a). Strikingly, the increase in CD40 on monocyte subsets was most pronounced at days 1 or 3 post boost relative to the increase post prime (Fig. 7a), suggesting an enhanced innate response to secondary vaccination, consistent with the enhanced transcriptional signatures of innate immunity during the secondary vaccination (Figs. 2 and 3). Consistent with this, we also observed a significant increase in the expression of CD40 on CD1c+ mDCs at days 1 and 3 post boost (Fig. 7b). The changes in cell frequencies and CD40 expression observed in children were recapitulated in the adult cohort (Fig. 7a, c). Enhanced activation of myeloid cells following the boost vaccination is consistent with the enhanced activation of multiple innate immunity pathways (Fig. 2d, f). We performed a gene-level correlation analysis to link the differences in gene expression between the pre-boost baseline and day 1 post boost and the changes in CD40 MFI at the same time points, followed by the GSEA analysis of genes ranked by their correlation coefficients. We observed that the expansion of a large number of innate immunity modules at day 1 post boost positively correlates with the increase of CD40 expression on all three monocyte subsets (Fig. 7d). Notably, many of the modules whose expression correlates with increased CD40 MFI also show persistent upregulation at the pre-boost baseline (day 28) compared to the pre-prime baseline (day 0) (Fig. 4b).Fig. 7: Cellular responses.Overall changes in the frequency of select cellular populations are shown for the infant cohorts (a, b), and directly comparing responses observed in adults and children (c). Asterisks indicate significant differences based on paired Wilcoxon test. For panels A and B, the changes occurring at day 1 post prime are shown in red; at day 1 post boost – in blue, and at day 3 post boost – in green. For (c), changes occurring in children are shown in orange, and in adults – in cyan. Horizontal lines indicate the median; boxes extend from first to third quartiles (25th and 75th percentiles); whiskers extend to the most distant value within 1.5 of interquartile range (IQR). d Correlations between transcriptional responses to boost vaccination and activation of monocyte subsets. Changes in gene expression between day 28 (pre-boost baseline) and day 29 (day 1 post boost) were correlated with the changes in CD40 MFI on monocyte subsets for the same days. Genes were ranked by correlation coefficients and GSEA was performed on the ranked lists of genes using BTMs. Size of circles represents the magnitude of enrichment, color – the direction of enrichment; opaque circles indicate the lack of statistical significance of enrichment.Full size imageDiscussionIn this study, we are describing a memory-like behavior of innate immune system, which becomes primed by the initial vaccination and responds more robustly to the secondary vaccination 28 days later (Fig. 8). These enhanced responses are evidenced by both more robust induction of transcriptional signatures of innate immunity, primarily interferon response pathways, and elevated activation of monocytes and dendritic cells after the secondary vaccination compared to the responses observed after the primary (Fig. 8). The same interferon response pathways that, on a transcriptional level, persist for 28 days after the primary vaccination and respond more robustly after the secondary, are also shown to be the correlates of local adverse effects of the vaccine, both at the baseline and post vaccination (Fig. 8).Fig. 8: Mechanistic summary.Primary vaccination triggers a transient peak of innate immune response, as evidenced by transcriptional analysis. This innate response, however, persists at low, but detectable level for 28 days post primary vaccination and does not diminish to the pre-vaccination baseline. Following the secondary injection, innate immune response is amplified compared to the same response to the primary vaccination. Transcriptional innate signatures of immune response correlate with elevated activation of monocytes and dendritic cells, as well with local adverse reactions to the vaccine. Created with BioRender.com.Full size imageIn the current study, we observed elevated innate responses following the boost vaccination, compared to the prime immunization. Boost immunization resulted in a stronger transcriptional response, with nearly three times the number of upregulated genes, compared with the prime vaccination (Fig. 2a). Among the genes upregulated at D1 post prime vaccination, roughly half were also induced at D1 post boost, while the rest were specific to the post-prime time point (Fig. 2b, c). Of interest, those genes that were consistently upregulated both post prime and post boost, were strongly enriched in interferon signaling pathways, while genes, specific to the post-prime responses were not. Quantitatively, many genes upregulated at D1 post prime were upregulated with a greater magnitude post boost (Fig. 2c, d). These genes were strongly enriched in interferon signaling pathways (Fig. 2f). Consistent with these observations, we observed enhanced activation of monocyte subsets and myeloid DCs in response to secondary vaccination, relative to that observed after primary vaccination (Figs. 7a, b and 8).It is generally postulated that innate immunity does not possess a memory component, and cells that mediate the initial response to the pathogen do so in a naïve fashion each time they encounter the same antigen. However, recently a concept of trained innate immunity37,38 has been proposed, that posits that in some settings innate immune responses can be primed by the initial exposure to respond more robustly to re-challenge39. This priming is mediated by epigenetic reprogramming of responding innate cellular populations, such as monocytes40. Our recent work shows that adjuvants elicit such priming of the innate immune system, resulting in enhanced innate responses upon re-challenge41. So, AS03 adjuvant, administered with H5N1 pandemic vaccine was shown to stimulate persistent epigenetic remodeling, increasing accessibility of multiple interferon response loci, resulting in increased expression of genes involved in antiviral response, and elevated resistance to unrelated viruses41. Epigenetic priming of the innate immune system can be long lasting. So, administration of OVA antigen in mice in combination with 3M-052-Alum adjuvant resulted in persistent changes in innate immune cells that lasted for at least 28 days42. Consistent with this notion, our recent work suggests that secondary vaccination with the BNT162b2 COVID-19 mRNA vaccine also induces an enhanced secondary innate response, characterized by an enhanced transcriptional signature of IFN signaling28. This was recently confirmed in other studies43.An inclusion of both pre-prime and pre-boost baselines allowed us to assess the long-lasting transcriptional responses to the prime vaccination in peripheral blood. Of interest, we observed that multiple innate immunity modules were upregulated at the day 28 pre-boost baseline compared with day 0 pre-prime baseline, suggesting their continuous activation as late as 28 days post prime vaccination (Figs. 4b and 8). This is similar to the re-activation of multiple innate immunity modules observed by us with an unrelated RTS,S malarial vaccine, which occurred 28 days following the previous vaccinations26. Long term effects of vaccines on innate immunity have been previously described. In particular, a yellow fever YF17D vaccine is known to induce long-term activation of monocytes and NK cells, lasting up to 60 days post vaccination44,45,46. Trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine was previously shown to induce long-lasting increase in frequency of both classical and inflammatory monocytes producing inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-10 and TNFα, which peaked at 28 days post vaccination47. Frequency of TNFα producing inflammatory monocytes at 28 days post vaccination was also linked to vaccine responsiveness in young volunteers47. In this study we observed strong induction of a large number of innate immunity gene modules at D28 post prime vaccination compared to the D0 pre-prime baseline (Fig. 4b). We also observed that a set of genes with high relevance to the interferon response is strongly induced at D1 post prime, but their expression does not return to baseline 28 days later. Following the boost, these same genes become re-activated again, and in some cases, their upregulation post boost exceeds in magnitude their upregulation post prime (Fig. 4a). Together with the published data, our results indicate that immune responses to the prime vaccination persist for at least 28 days, and that the immune system does not return to the steady state between prime and boost vaccine administrations, instead existing in the “heightened preparedness” state and responds more robustly to the boost injection. This difference in baselines is important for interpretation of the results presented here, since cohorts B and C, sampled at day 1 and day 3 post boost, lack the pre-vaccination baseline, and the post-vaccination responses are compared to the pre-boost baselines for the respective subjects.We demonstrated that concomitant activation of transcriptional interferon response program tracks with local vaccine reactogenicity, such as redness at the site of injection (Fig. 5a, b, Supplementary Fig. 5C and Fig. 8), and swelling (Supplementary Fig. 5A, B) in both children and adults. Interferon signaling as a trigger of local reactogenicity has been previously described for the BNT162b2 COVID-19 vaccine48. This is a novel concept, as previously it was generally postulated that local production of cytokines, vasodilators, prostaglandins and complement factors, in combination with local cell recruitment, triggers local adverse effects, such as pain, redness and swelling49. MF-59 was previously shown to elicit distinct physiological response patterns, which were not observed with unadjuvanted TIV vaccine50. It was also noted that elevated inflammatory responses, typical for adjuvanted vaccines50,51,52 tracks with increased reactogenicity, although no direct mechanistic link was proposed50. We also investigated baseline correlates of downstream vaccine reactogenicity and demonstrated that activation of multiple innate immunity gene modules, including IFN signaling at baseline tracks with local reactogenicity in children (Figs. 5c and 8). To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that activation of IFN signaling pathways prior to vaccination correlates with local adverse effects of the vaccine. Of interest, we did not identify any transcriptional signatures of systemic reactogenicity, such as fever.Taken together, our observations highlight important differences transcriptional and cellular responses to the prime vaccination (as the majority of young children are naïve to at least one vaccine strain) and recall responses to boost vaccination in children or vaccination in adults. Presented data highlight the differences and similarities of the mechanisms that lead to the development of protective immunity to the adjuvanted TIV vaccine in children and adults and affords a glance at the dynamic picture of how these mechanisms unfold following the naïve and recall responses.MethodsSample collection and processingBlood for transcriptomics, HAI and cellular response was collected at all of the time points indicated in Fig. 1a.TranscriptomicsFrom all cohorts, 0.5–1.0 ml blood was obtained in 2.76 ml of Paxgene buffer (PreAnalyx, UK), and gently inverted to mix. The blood was kept at room temperature until storage at −80 °C (within 2–6 h of venipuncture) until being shipped for RNA isolation, hybridization and analysis at Emory University (Atlanta, GA).Plasma collection for hemagglutination (HAI) analysisHeparinized whole blood (0.5–3.5 ml) was collected from all participants, stored at room temperature prior to plasma separation within 6 h of venipuncture. Blood was centrifuged at 1800 × g for 10 min, the plasma layer transferred to a fresh tube and re-spun at 1800 × g for 10 min to remove residual cells and then aliquoted and stored at −80 °C prior to shipment for HAI analysis, to VisMederi Srl, Sienna, Italy.Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)Heparinized whole blood (1–5.0 ml) was collected from all participants and stored at room temperature for shipment to the Weatherall Institute for Molecular Medicine, Oxford, UK for processing and analysis of cellular responses.Hemagglutination (HAI) assaysVisMederi Srl Laboratories (Sienna, Italy) conducted the HAI assays in agreement with standard procedures. The assays were conducted using viral antigens from influenza strains (A/California/07/2009, A/Switzerland/9715293/2013, and B/Phuket/3073/2013) provided by the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC). HAI was measured at baseline for each vaccine dose (cohort A day 0, cohort B and C day 28) and 28 days post-second vaccination for children; and baseline and 28 days post-vaccination in adults. Samples were analyzed in duplicate and treated to remove non-specific inhibitors of HAI. Twofold, serial dilutions, starting at 1:10 were incubated with the same volume of influenza antigen, followed by incubation with turkey red blood cells. The level of hemagglutination was assessed by the naked eye and HAI titers calculated as the reciprocal value of the highest serum dilution where hemagglutination was still inhibited. Seroprotection rates were calculated at HAI thresholds of 1:40 for adults and 1:629 for children, as previously described by Black et al.35 as a more accurate correlate of protection for children. The fold rise from baseline to day 28 (adults and children) and to day 56 (children only) was used for seroconversion rates.RNA isolation and hybridizationTotal RNA was isolated from whole blood. Transcriptional profiling was performed using Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) HG-133plus2.0PM chips.Transcriptional data analysisRaw hybridization data were QCed using ArrayQualityMetrics R package53. Intensity data were normalized by RMA. Downstream processing was performed using custom codes written in R.Statistical methodsFor differential gene expression, paired t test was used, followed by false discovery rate (FDR) adjustment at α level 0.05. Significantly regulated genes were defined as those with FDR < 0.05 and absolute fold change >1.5 (0.585 on a log2 scale). Reactome pathway analysis was performed online (www.reactome.org). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA version 3.0 with 5,000 permutations. Significance of module enrichment was determined by FDR q value. K-means clustering was performed in SAS JMP Pro 16 software. For the genes whose expression tracks with adverse effects, genes were selected based on greater than twofold mean difference in baseline-adjusted expression levels between AE and no AE groups. For correlations with HAI titers, gene-wise baseline-adjusted expression levels were correlated to HAI titers and Spearman Rho coefficients were used as input to GSEA. For cellular responses, significant differences in cell frequencies were determined by paired Wilcoxon test.Analysis of cellular responsesWhole blood was processed and stained within 4 h from collection. 1 ml of blood was incubated for 15 min on ice with ACK buffer to lyse red blood cell. Cells where extensively washed in FACS Buffer containing 2% Fetal Bovine Serum (Sigma) and 0.05% NaN3 (Sigma) and then stained with a cocktail of antibodies directed against CD33 (WM53, PE, eBioscience, catalog number 12-0338-42, dilution 1:40), CD123 (6H6, PE-e610, eBioscience, catalog number 61-1239-42, dilution 1:40), CD1c (L161, PE-Cy7, Biolegend, catalog number 331515, dilution 1:20), CD16 (eBioCB16, APC, eBioscience, catalog number 17-0168-42, dilution 1:40), CD11b (M1/70, A700, Biolegend, catalog number 101222, dilution 1:10), HLA-DR (L243, APC-Cy7, Biolegend, catalog number 307617, dilution 1:40), CD80 (2D10, Bv421, Biolegend, catalog number 305221, dilution 1:20), CD14 (M5E2, BV605, Biolegend, catalog number 301833, dilution 1:40) CD40 (BV711, 5C3, Biolegend, catalog number 334334, dilution 1:20), CD15 (W6D3, BV650, Biolegend, catalog number 323034, dilution 1:50), CD38 (HIT2, BV780, Becton Dickinson, catalog number 563964, dilution 1:40), CD86 (FUN1, BB515, Becton Dickinson, catalog number 564545, dilution 1:20), CD141 (M80, PerCP/Cy5.5, Biolegend, catalog number 344111, dilution 1:20). Dead cells were excluded with LIVE/DEAD® Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain Kit (Life Technologies Ltd). Cells where then fixed in 2% Paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences) and analyzed within 48 h from staining. Samples were acquired on a BD LSRFortessa™ X20. Data were analyzed by FlowJo (v10.5) using the gating strategy described in Supplementary Fig. 7.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The gene expression dataset generated and analyzed during the current study is available in the NCBI GEO repository, accession number GSE223316. Code availability The underlying code for this study is not publicly available but may be made available to qualified researchers on reasonable request from the corresponding author. ReferencesShang, M., Blanton, L., Brammer, L., Olsen, S. J. & Fry, A. M. Influenza-associated pediatric deaths in the United States, 2010-2016. Pediatrics https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2017-2918 (2018)Wong, K. K. et al. Influenza-associated pediatric deaths in the United States, 2004-2012. Pediatrics 132, 796–804 (2013).Article PubMed Google Scholar Jefferson, T., Rivetti, A., Di Pietrantonj, C. & Demicheli, V. Vaccines for preventing influenza in healthy children. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2, CD004879 (2018).PubMed Google Scholar Block, S. L. et al. Dose-range study of MF59-adjuvanted versus nonadjuvanted monovalent A/H1N1 pandemic influenza vaccine in six- to less than thirty-six-month-old children. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 31, e92–e98 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Della Cioppa, G., Vesikari, T., Sokal, E., Lindert, K. & Nicolay, U. Trivalent and quadrivalent MF59((R))-adjuvanted influenza vaccine in young children: a dose- and schedule-finding study. Vaccine 29, 8696–8704 (2011).Article PubMed Google Scholar Nakaya, H. I. et al. Systems biology of immunity to MF59-adjuvanted versus nonadjuvanted trivalent seasonal influenza vaccines in early childhood. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 1853–1858 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Puig-Barbera, J., Perez-Vilar, S. & Diez-Domingo, J. MF59-adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine in young children. Expert Rev. Vaccines 10, 1519–1528 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vesikari, T. et al. Homologous and heterologous antibody responses to a one-year booster dose of an MF59((R)) adjuvanted A/H5N1 pre-pandemic influenza vaccine in pediatric subjects. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 8, 921–928 (2012).Article CAS Google Scholar Vesikari, T., Groth, N., Karvonen, A., Borkowski, A. & Pellegrini, M. MF59-adjuvanted influenza vaccine (FLUAD) in children: safety and immunogenicity following a second year seasonal vaccination. Vaccine 27, 6291–6295 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vesikari, T. et al. Enhanced immunogenicity of seasonal influenza vaccines in young children using MF59 adjuvant. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 28, 563–571 (2009).Article PubMed Google Scholar Patel, S. S., Bizjajeva, S., Heijnen, E. & Oberye, J. MF59-adjuvanted seasonal trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine: Safety and immunogenicity in young children at risk of influenza complications. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 85S, S18–S25 (2019).Article PubMed Google Scholar Vesikari, T. et al. Oil-in-water emulsion adjuvant with influenza vaccine in young children. N. Engl. J. Med. 365, 1406–1416 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Patel, S. S., Bizjajeva, S., Lindert, K., Heijnen, E. & Oberye, J. Cumulative clinical experience with MF59-adjuvanted trivalent seasonal influenza vaccine in young children. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 85S, S26–S38 (2019).Article PubMed Google Scholar Zedda, L. et al. Dissecting the immune response to MF59-adjuvanted and nonadjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccines in children less than three years of age. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 34, 73–78 (2015).Article PubMed Google Scholar Liang, F. et al. Vaccine priming is restricted to draining lymph nodes and controlled by adjuvant-mediated antigen uptake. Sci. Transl. Med. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aal2094 (2017).Mosca, F. et al. Molecular and cellular signatures of human vaccine adjuvants. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 10501–10506 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Caproni, E. et al. MF59 and Pam3CSK4 boost adaptive responses to influenza subunit vaccine through an IFN type I-independent mechanism of action. J. Immunol. 188, 3088–3098 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Seubert, A., Monaci, E., Pizza, M., O’Hagan, D. T. & Wack, A. The adjuvants aluminum hydroxide and MF59 induce monocyte and granulocyte chemoattractants and enhance monocyte differentiation toward dendritic cells. J. Immunol. 180, 5402–5412 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar O’Hagan, D. T. MF59 is a safe and potent vaccine adjuvant that enhances protection against influenza virus infection. Expert Rev. Vaccines 6, 699–710 (2007).Article PubMed Google Scholar Fourati, S. et al. Pan-vaccine analysis reveals innate immune endotypes predictive of antibody responses to vaccination. Nat. Immunol. 23, 1777–1787 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Querec, T. D. et al. Systems biology approach predicts immunogenicity of the yellow fever vaccine in humans. Nat. Immunol. 10, 116–125 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gaucher, D. et al. Yellow fever vaccine induces integrated multilineage and polyfunctional immune responses. J. Exp. Med. 205, 3119–3131 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Li, S. et al. Molecular signatures of antibody responses derived from a systems biology study of five human vaccines. Nat. Immunol. 15, 195–204 (2014).Article PubMed Google Scholar Li, S. et al. Metabolic phenotypes of response to vaccination in humans. Cell 169, 862.e7–877.e7 (2017).Article Google Scholar Qi, Q. et al. Defective T memory cell differentiation after varicella zoster vaccination in older individuals. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005892 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kazmin, D. et al. Systems analysis of protective immune responses to RTS,S malaria vaccination in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 2425–2430 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar van den Berg, R. A. et al. Predicting RTS,S vaccine-mediated protection from transcriptomes in a malaria-challenge clinical trial. Front. Immunol. 8, 557 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Arunachalam, P. S. et al. Systems vaccinology of the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine in humans. Nature 596, 410–416 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nakaya, H. I. et al. Systems biology of vaccination for seasonal influenza in humans. Nat. Immunol. 12, 786–795 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Nakaya, H. I. et al. Systems analysis of immunity to influenza vaccination across multiple years and in diverse populations reveals shared molecular signatures. Immunity 43, 1186–1198 (2015).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Furman, D. et al. Apoptosis and other immune biomarkers predict influenza vaccine responsiveness. Mol. Syst. Biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/Msb.2013.15 (2013).Franco, L. M. et al. Integrative genomic analysis of the human immune response to influenza vaccination. Elife 2, e00299 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tsang, J. S. et al. Global analyses of human immune variation reveal baseline predictors of postvaccination responses. Cell 157, 499–513 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cao, R. G. et al. Differences in antibody responses between trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine and live attenuated influenza vaccine correlate with the kinetics and magnitude of interferon signaling in children. J. Infect. Dis. 210, 224–233 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Black, S. et al. Hemagglutination inhibition antibody titers as a correlate of protection for inactivated influenza vaccines in children. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 30, 1081–1085 (2011).Article PubMed Google Scholar Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15545–15550 (2005).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Blok, B. A., Arts, R. J., van Crevel, R., Benn, C. S. & Netea, M. G. Trained innate immunity as underlying mechanism for the long-term, nonspecific effects of vaccines. J. Leukoc. Biol. 98, 347–356 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Netea, M. G., Latz, E., Mills, K. H. & O’Neill, L. A. Innate immune memory: a paradigm shift in understanding host defense. Nat. Immunol. 16, 675–679 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Netea, M. G. Training innate immunity: the changing concept of immunological memory in innate host defence. Eur. J. Clin. Investig. 43, 881–884 (2013).Article CAS Google Scholar Saeed, S. et al. Epigenetic programming of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and trained innate immunity. Science 345, 1251086 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wimmers, F. et al. The single-cell epigenomic and transcriptional landscape of immunity to influenza vaccination. Cell 184, 3915.e1–3935.e1 (2021).Article Google Scholar Lee, A. et al. A molecular atlas of innate immunity to adjuvanted and live attenuated vaccines, in mice. Nat. Commun. 13, 549 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Yamaguchi, Y. et al. Consecutive BNT162b2 mRNA vaccination induces short-term epigenetic memory in innate immune cells. JCI Insight https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.163347 (2022).Silva, M. L. et al. Characterization of main cytokine sources from the innate and adaptive immune responses following primary 17DD yellow fever vaccination in adults. Vaccine 29, 583–592 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Martins, M. A. et al. Innate immunity phenotypic features point toward simultaneous raise of activation and modulation events following 17DD live attenuated yellow fever first-time vaccination. Vaccine 26, 1173–1184 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Neves, P. C., Matos, D. C., Marcovistz, R. & Galler, R. TLR expression and NK cell activation after human yellow fever vaccination. Vaccine 27, 5543–5549 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Mohanty, S. et al. Prolonged proinflammatory cytokine production in monocytes modulated by interleukin 10 after influenza vaccination in older adults. J. Infect. Dis. 211, 1174–1184 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Takano, T. et al. Distinct immune cell dynamics correlate with the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine. Cell Rep. Med. 3, 100631 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Herve, C. et al. The how’s and what’s of vaccine reactogenicity. NPJ Vaccines 4, 39 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Weiner, J. et al. Characterization of potential biomarkers of reactogenicity of licensed antiviral vaccines: randomized controlled clinical trials conducted by the BIOVACSAFE consortium. Sci. Rep. 9, 20362 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Howard, L. M. et al. Cell-based systems biology analysis of human AS03-adjuvanted H5N1 avian influenza vaccine responses: a phase I randomized controlled trial. PLoS ONE 12, e0167488 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Burny, W. et al. Different adjuvants induce common innate pathways that are associated with enhanced adaptive responses against a model antigen in humans. Front. Immunol. 8, 943 (2017).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kauffmann, A., Gentleman, R. & Huber, W. arrayQualityMetrics–a bioconductor package for quality assessment of microarray data. Bioinformatics 25, 415–416 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThe study was funded by the European Commission program Advanced Immunization Technologies (ADITEC) and the NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre. We also acknowledge the NIH grants U19AI057266-20 and 1U19AI167903-01 to B.P., and we thank Open Philanthropy for supporting this work in B.P.’s lab. The funders played no role in study design, data collection, analysis and interpretation of data, or the writing of this manuscript.Author informationAuthor notesEmmanuele MontomoliPresent address: Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, ItalyRino RappuoliPresent address: Fondazione Biotecnopolo, Siena, ItalyThese authors contributed equally: Dmitri Kazmin, Elizabeth A. Clutterbuck, Giorgio Napolitani, Amanda L. Wilkins.Authors and AffiliationsInstitute for Immunology, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USADmitri Kazmin & Bali PulendranOxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, and the NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UKElizabeth A. Clutterbuck, Amanda L. Wilkins, Amber J. Thompson, Smiti Bihari, Rachel White, Claire Jones, Matthew D. Snape & Andrew J. PollardMedical Research Council (MRC), Human Immunology Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKGiorgio Napolitani & Andrea TarltonThe Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, AustraliaAmanda L. WilkinsVisMederi Srl, Via Fiorentina, Siena, ItalyEmmanuele Montomoli & Guilia LapiniNuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, Clinical Trials Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKUshma Galal & Ly-Mee YuGlaxoSmithKline, Siena, ItalyRino Rappuoli & Giuseppe Del GiudiceDepartment of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USABali PulendranDepartment of Pathology, and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USABali PulendranEmory Vaccine Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USABali PulendranAuthorsDmitri KazminView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarElizabeth A. ClutterbuckView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGiorgio NapolitaniView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAmanda L. WilkinsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrea TarltonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAmber J. ThompsonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarEmmanuele MontomoliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGuilia LapiniView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSmiti BihariView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRachel WhiteView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarClaire JonesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMatthew D. SnapeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarUshma GalalView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLy-Mee YuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRino RappuoliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGiuseppe Del GiudiceView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrew J. PollardView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarBali PulendranView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsD.K. participated in the study design, performed the analyses and wrote the manuscript with B.P.; G.N. (co-first author) supervised the Flow Cytometry analysis; A.T. performed the staining; A.L.W. (co-first author) was the lead study physician, wrote protocol, conducted study visits and recruitment and assisted with data analysis; S.B. was the study physician, conducted recruitment and study visits; E.A.C. (co-first author) had oversight of clinical trial laboratory activities; A.J.T. implemented the laboratory analysis plan and training for the laboratory activities; R.W. was lead study nurse undertaking participant visits and data collection; C.J. was the Clinical Trial Project Manager; M.D.S. was CI; U.G. was statistician; L.-M.Y. was senior statistician; E.M. and G.L. performed HAI assays; G.D.G. was co-investigator; R.R. was a program lead; A.J.P. and B.P. were principal investigators.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Dmitri Kazmin, Andrew J. Pollard or Bali Pulendran.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. A.J.P. is chair of the UK Department of Health and Social Care’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and was a member of WHO’s SAGE until 2022. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary MaterialREPORTING SUMMARYRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKazmin, D., Clutterbuck, E.A., Napolitani, G. et al. Memory-like innate response to booster vaccination with MF-59 adjuvanted influenza vaccine in children. npj Vaccines 8, 100 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-023-00702-1Download citationReceived: 27 February 2023Accepted: 29 June 2023Published: 13 July 2023DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41541-023-00702-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Collections Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Content types Journal Information About the Editors Contact Open Access Calls for Papers Editorial policies Article Processing Charges Journal Metrics About the Partner Publish with us For Authors and Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies npj Vaccines (npj Vaccines) ISSN 2059-0105 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingWhy are children most affected by this year’s cold and flu season? - CSIRO Blog icon Skip to content Skip to search AUSTRALIA’S NATIONAL SCIENCE AGENCY About Research Work with us Careers Education News Events Search Quick links Climate change COVID-19 research Diets Staff profiles Home ... News All news and articles Why are children most affected by this year’s cold and flu season? Our immunologist Dr Daniel Layton explains why children are making up the flu and COVID-19 numbers this year. Contact Share By Daniel Layton , Fiona McFarlane 13 July 2023 5 min read Key points This year’s cold and flu season is shaping up to be a big one, possibly like the largest on record. Influenza infections are the most reported infections so far this season. Children have accounted for almost 80 per cent of those admitted to hospital. The 2023 flu season is shaping up to be like the influenza season of 2019 – the largest on record in Australia. The difference is this year children have accounted for almost 80 per cent of those admitted to hospital. Dr Daniel Layton is an expert immunologist working at our Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness. We spoke to him to get answers to some common questions about this year’s flu and COVID-19 numbers. What are the main respiratory infections this year? Every year, around this time, we start to see a sharp rise in respiratory infections. It is often called the cold and flu season. The common cold can be from one of 200 different viruses. One virus, called rhinovirus, accounts for between 10 and 40 per cent of infections. Other common infections are from coronaviruses (other than COVID-19) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). More serious infections come from the influenza virus and SARS-CoV2 (the virus that causes COVID-19). So far this year, influenza is the most reported infection. Of the group tested, about 33 per cent (33.1%) of people had the flu, followed by almost 30 per cent (29.6%) having rhinovirus. COVID-19 accounted for about 18 per cent (17.5%) of cases and about nine per cent (8.9%) were positive for RSV. What are the flu numbers this year? There are two things to consider in the flu season. These are the number of cases and the severity of infections. From 1 January to 25 June this year, there were 116,473 laboratory confirmed cases of influenza. A quarter of these were diagnosed in the last two weeks. This is early in the flu season to see such high numbers, and they are well above the five-year average. The peak of the flu season is usually in late-July to early-October. With the high numbers already seen, there is a possibility we will see flu numbers like those seen in 2019. This was the largest number of cases of flu on record in Australia. It is still too early in the year to comment on the severity of this season’s flu. However, there is no sign of worsened disease so far. A 3D computer-generated rendering of a whole influenza (flu) virus. Why are children particularly vulnerable? Most often, children are the largest group of patients requiring care for respiratory viruses. The highest number of hospitalisations are in children aged five years or younger. The reason for this is differences in their immune systems. A child’s immune system is still developing, leaving them more vulnerable to worsened infection. Adult immune systems have experienced influenza more often. Our immune system remembers the virus and can react quickly to protect us. Why are children’s hospitalisation rates so high this year? The most likely explanation is a drop in vaccination rates. This year childhood vaccination rates are much lower than in previous years. Currently, only about 23 per cent (22.7%) of children aged six months to five years are vaccinated for influenza. And only about 13 per cent (13.3%) of children aged five to 15 years are vaccinated. These numbers are much lower than in previous years. In the years before the COVID-19 pandemic, about 41 per cent (41.3%) of children aged six months to five years were vaccinated and about 26 per cent (26.2%) for the five to 15-year-old age group. Why are vaccination rates so much lower this year? It’s very difficult to say why vaccination rates have dropped. However, given a lot of our behaviours and how we interact, including with GPs, has changed post COVID-19, this may be a flow on effect from the pandemic. What figures are we seeing for respiratory syncytial virus? Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the 200 viruses we call a cold. But it can cause severe disease in children. Because of this, and it being quite common, more research on solutions for RSV has been done recently. This year, to 3 July, we’ve seen 69, 997 reported cases of RSV. This is a higher figure than last year. This is likely due to increased testing for RSV. In 2021, RSV became a notifiable disease in Australia. This means we now record the number of cases each year to help understand and control disease outbreaks. Does RSV affect children more than adults? Much like other respiratory diseases, RSV can have a greater impact on both children and the elderly. Most children will have been infected with RSV by the age of two. In most cases, the symptoms are like the common cold. In about three per cent of cases, RSV infection can result in hospitalisation. This is often due to the development of bronchiolitis or pneumonia. Dr Daniel Layton is an expert immunologist working at our Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness. What are the COVID-19 numbers? During May we saw a rise in the number of COVID-19 cases. At its peak, we were seeing more than 5000 cases per day. The number of infections dropped off during June to less than 2000 cases per day. What is causing the increase in respiratory disease numbers? A lot of what we are seeing this year is consistent with previous cold and flu seasons. However, the lower vaccination rates are having an impact in higher numbers of hospitalisations. This is a good reminder to get yourself and the kids vaccinated for influenza each year. Will there be a combined COVID and flu vaccine? While it is now common to receive the influenza and COVID vaccines at the same time, we haven’t yet seen a combined vaccine hit the market. These combination vaccines are currently undergoing clinical testing to ensure they are both safe and effective. Why can some of these infections result in serious illness? Some infections like influenza and COVID-19 can spread quickly in our bodies. They can also mutate to avoid our immune system defences. This leaves us more vulnerable and might result in needing medical support. Infection in some people with pre-existing conditions can lead to further complications as well. In general, it is important to wash our hands often. Stay home if we’re feeling unwell. And remember to get vaccinated when vaccines are available. This will help to stop the spread of viruses and reduce the impact on friends and family. Go inside Australia’s national biocontainment facility. Coming up next20 Jul 2023 Unlocking aquaculture potential in Australia’s Top End Previous post18 July 2023 Forget Barbie: Meet CSIRO's real-life STEM role models Categories Health Latest Article 12 November 2024 5 min read ‘Death hotspot’: we found 145 koalas killed along a single Queensland highway last year Article 12 November 2024 5 min read Down in the weeds: how host specificity testing works Article 11 November 2024 3 min read How AI is helping us understand animal behaviour Article 11 November 2024 9 min read The energy transition is affecting attitudes towards mining Article 8 November 2024 4 min read Living STEM: bringing science classes to life on Country Categories Health Latest Article 12 November 2024 5 min read ‘Death hotspot’: we found 145 koalas killed along a single Queensland highway last year Article 12 November 2024 5 min read Down in the weeds: how host specificity testing works Article 11 November 2024 3 min read How AI is helping us understand animal behaviour Article 11 November 2024 9 min read The energy transition is affecting attitudes towards mining Article 8 November 2024 4 min read Living STEM: bringing science classes to life on Country At CSIRO, we solve the greatest challenges through innovative science and technology. Access to information Accessibility Copyright Legal notice and disclaimer Policy & Guidelines Your privacy We are committed to child safety and to the implementation of Child Safe principles and procedures. Contact us 1300 363 400 Subscribe to our newsletter Enter your email address Please leave this field empty or your enquiry will not be submitted: You shouldn't be able to see this field. Please try again and leave the field blank. Subscribe Thanks. You're all set to get our newsletter We could not sign you up to receive our newsletter. Please try again later or contact us if this persists. CSIRO acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the land, sea and waters, of the area that we live and work on across Australia. We acknowledge their continuing connection to their culture and pay our respects to their Elders past and present. View our vision towards reconciliation. Show Info Contact us Find out how we can help you and your business. Get in touch using the form below and our experts will get in contact soon! CSIRO will handle your personal information in accordance with the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) and our Privacy Policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Email * Enter a valid email address, for example jane.doe@csiro.au Country * A Country value must be provided First name * First name must be filled in Surname * Surname must be filled in I am representing * Myself Organisation (let us know in your enquiry if you are a small to medium enterprise) Please choose an option Organisation (let us know in your enquiry if you are a small to medium enterprise) * Organisation must be filled in Enquiry Subject * Please provide a subject for the enquriy 0 / 100 Your enquiry * We'll need to know what you want to contact us about so we can give you an answer 0 / 1900 I’d like to hear more by subscribing to CSIRO's monthly newsletter, Snapshot. Send enquiry Please leave this field empty or your enquiry will not be submitted: You shouldn't be able to see this field. Please try again and leave the field blank. Thank you We have received your enquiry and will reply soon. We're Sorry The contact form is currently unavailable. Please try again later. If this problem persists, please call us with your enquiry on 1300 363 400 or +61 3 9545 2176. We are available from 9.00 am to 4.00 pm AEST Monday - Friday.Why are Australian children dying from the flu and what can we do to prevent it? | Health | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/1Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal development State health authorities say they have seen high infection and hospitalisation rates in children, with concerns over high rates of unvaccinated children. Photograph: Asanka Ratnayake/Getty ImagesView image in fullscreenState health authorities say they have seen high infection and hospitalisation rates in children, with concerns over high rates of unvaccinated children. Photograph: Asanka Ratnayake/Getty ImagesHealth This article is more than 1 year oldExplainerWhy are Australian children dying from the flu and what can we do to prevent it?This article is more than 1 year oldMedical experts say influenza A and B viruses circulating have greater impact on children and urge more vaccinations after second child dies Follow our Australia news live blog for the latest updates Get our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast Donna Lu Science writerThu 13 Jul 2023 16.00 BSTLast modified on Fri 14 Jul 2023 01.01 BSTShareHealth authorities are urging more young people to get the flu vaccine amid warnings that children are at heightened risk from influenza strains circulating this season.An 11-year-old Queensland girl was the second young person reported to die from influenza this week, after a student on the New South Wales Central Coast died days after contracting the virus.The Doherty Institute’s Prof Ian Barr, who is deputy director of the World Health Organization’s collaborating centre for reference and research on influenza, said flu strains circulating this winter had a greater impact on young people.Queensland girl, 11, dies after contracting influenza B amid surge in cases among childrenRead more“The viruses which are circulating this year are influenza A(H1N1) and B viruses – both of these viruses affect children more than the elderly,” he said. “We haven’t seen the B viruses around much for the last two years.”Children make up a significant proportion of the 153,941 laboratory-confirmed flu cases this year to date. As of 13 July there have been 19,241 cases reported in under-fives, 31,172 cases in five- to nine-year-olds, and 18,678 in 10- to 14-year-olds.More than a third of all cases reported nationally have been in NSW (53,343), with Queensland reporting the second-highest number of infections (48,342). Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup State health authorities across the country told Guardian Australia they had seen high infection and hospitalisation rates in children.In NSW, children aged zero to 16 represented almost 47% of all admissions from emergency departments for influenza-like illness in the week ending 9 July.Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said he was “very concerned about the increase in influenza B cases and the high rate of unvaccinated patients, particularly with school resuming this week”.He said in a statement: “Influenza B is causing severe illness in otherwise healthy Queenslanders, young people in particular.”“Since 1 July, 78 children aged six months to four years old were hospitalised with flu – 50 with the B strain. Only one of these children was vaccinated.”Dr Paul Armstrong, Western Australia’s acting chief health officer, said almost 40% of those who required hospitalisation for influenza treatment in the state this year were aged under nine.“WA data suggests that we are on track for a large influenza season, similar to 2019, which was the largest on record in WA,” he said in a statement.A South Australia health spokesperson said: “Those aged six months to five years, and five to 15 years are experiencing more influenza infections this year than any other age group.” They noted there had been no reported deaths in children in the state. Influenza B strains accounted for about 20% of the virus circulating in SA.Children normally overrepresented in infection ratesDr Daryl Cheng, an immunisation consultant at the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute’s SAEFVIC, said the highest rates of positive flu cases were usually in children under five.“They are an at-risk group,” he said, adding that testing in this age group may be higher than in adults.Barr agreed that children were typically over-represented in flu infection rates, likely due to more diligent monitoring of symptoms and testing than in adults.Cheng said hospitalisation rates this year were similar to pre-Covid flu seasons. Historical figures show that hospitalisation rates in children under five are much higher than in elderly people.Data recorded between 2006 and 2013 found that hospitalisation rates were highest in children aged zero to five months (192 per 100,000), followed by those aged six to 23 months (109 per 100,000).skip past newsletter promotionSign up to Afternoon UpdateFree daily newsletterOur Australian afternoon update breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it mattersEnter your email address Sign upPrivacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.after newsletter promotionFlu deaths in kids rareInfluenza is a leading cause of vaccine-preventable death in Australian children, but flu deaths in young people are rare.Cheng has noted “no anomaly or spike” in child deaths from influenza this year to date in Victoria. “That doesn’t mean people shouldn’t get the vaccine [to] protect themselves,” he said. “It’s still early in the season.”Cheng added there had been deaths in NSW and Queensland “in age groups such as adolescents which are not eligible for flu vaccination as part of the national immunisation program”.Between 2006 and 2013, the influenza mortality rate was the lowest in five- to 11-year-olds of any age group, at 0.05 deaths per 100,000 people, and was less than 0.35 deaths per 100,000 in under-fives.‘Rollercoaster of a sickness’: how a horror flu season is catching Australian families off guardRead moreIn comparison with kids under five, those aged 65 to 74 were more than twice as likely to die from the flu; in those over 75, the mortality rate was more than 10 times greater.In another study of Australian children hospitalised with influenza between 2010 and 2019, the mortality rate was 0.4% or one in every 2,500 children hospitalised.FluCAN surveillance data as of 25 June, which monitors influenza admissions at 15 hospitals nationally, shows that of those younger than 16 years hospitalised with influenza this year, 5.9% were admitted to ICU. In comparison, 12.1% of adults aged 16 to 64 and 1.8% of adults aged 65 years or older went to ICU.Vaccine coverage lowNational immunisation data shows that flu vaccine coverage is low in young people, and down about 10 percentage points from last year. Only 23.6% of under-fives and 13.7% of five- to 15-year-olds have been vaccinated this year to date, compared to 61.5% of those over 65.“I suspect it’s probably [a] combination of vaccine fatigue and reduced access to in-person consultations with GPs,” Barr said.“Kiddies are going back to school now so there will probably be a little bit of a spike,” he added. “People should still consider getting vaccinated if they haven’t already been infected.”Influenza vaccinations are free for children aged six months to five years under the National Immunisation Program. They are also included on the childhood vaccination schedule.Explore more on these topicsHealthFluexplainersShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal developmentNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)5 things you need to know about Bird Flu - BirdLife International × Welcome to BirdLife International en As a global Partnership, we believe in internationalism. We have translated as much content in your language as our resources allow. Please visit the English language site to view all of our content. Visit English Site Stay on current site Skip to Content arrow-downarrow-top-rightemailfacebooklinkedinlocationmagnifypinterestprintredditsearch-button-closesearch-buttontriangletwitter HomeAboutHow we workNewsAdvocacyOur scienceSupport UsBecome a member Show Global Search Close Global Search Donate Menu Close Clear SearchPress enter for results Menu Close Clear SearchPress enter for resultsHomeAboutHow we workNewsAdvocacyOur scienceSupport UsBecome a member Show Global Search Close Global Search 13 July 20235 things you need to know about Bird Flu Bird Flu is causing unparalleled mortality of wild birds and other animals worldwide. A new statement from the Scientific Task Force on Avian Influenza and Wild Birds, of which BirdLife is a member, offers key insights on the impacts this disease has on wild birds, and importantly what needs to be done about it. WARNING: GRAPHIC AND SENSITIVE CONTENT Share 1.We need to tackle this disease now. REad the Full Report hereBird Flu has evolved to spread more rapidly and easily in wild bird populations. Previously, this disease spread significantly in farmed bird populations and it was quite rare for wild birds to catch it – when outbreaks did occur, they usually impacted a limited number of species and only lasted a few months. This is no longer the case. With birds under greater threat than ever before, this virulent strain of Bird Flu cannot be categorised as a natural process and left to wreak havoc.Northern fulmar Fulmarus glacialis, deceased individual on a beach as the result of Avian Flu, Shetland Isles, Scotland, June 20222. Governments are not doing enough to prioritise wild birds.Efforts to monitor the impact of this disease have been focused on farmed birds. However, understanding the impact on wild birds will help us manage the disease better as well as work towards the recovery of impacted populations.©Garry-Donaldson, Northern-Gannet3. We must work together. Bird Flu affects us in many ways through its impacts on environmental health, conservation and farming. We cannot manage this disease separately, instead all sectors must strategically work together to combat all impacts of Bird Flu. The proposed ‘One Health’ approach tackles this disease in an integrated way across all impacted sectors.Barnacle goose Branta leucopsis, RSPB staff removing dead bird that have died as a result of Avian Influenza, RSPB Mersehead Nature Reserve, Dumfries and Galloway, Scotland, January 20224. Culling birds is pointless.Protecting habitats, providing alternative places for birds to breed, and other conservation efforts can help wild birds weather the impacts of Bird Flu. Spraying disinfectant may harm the environment, while culling birds is pointless and can even be counterproductive.©Johnny-Giese, Shutterstock5. We must change the way farmed birds are managed. Bird Flu originates from poultry farming. Most likely caused by having too many birds in too little space, combined with poor containment of contact with wild birds. The nature and sustainability of poultry farming must be changed to prevent future disease outbreaks.© Roee shpernikWhat can you do about it?The best thing you can do to help is look out for dead birds (but avoid close contact) and report them to your local environmental authority. This will help us understand the impact of this disease and how many birds are being affected. If you are not sure who this is, contact your local BirdLife Partner and support them to protect birds in crisis. Registered charity1042125 Help UsDonateBecome a memberSpecies ChampionsLegaciesShopGet InvolvedNewsletter signupCareersDataZoneHatch at BirdLifeContact usAbout BirdLifeThe BirdLife PartnersOur DonorsScientific papers and reportsOur annual reviewDiversity, Equity, and InclusionMy BirdLifeNewsletter settingsSitemapSupporter PromiseLegalPrivacy policyTerms of useCookie settingsComplaints procedure BirdLife's x.com Facebook Instagram LinkedIn © BirdLife International. All rights reserved. Product Design & Development by Hex DigitalResearchers identify glycolipid that blocks infection with SARS-CoV-2 and RSV Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Researchers identify glycolipid that blocks infection with SARS-CoV-2 and RSV Download PDF Copy By Shanet Susan AlexReviewed by Benedette Cuffari, M.Sc.Jul 11 2023 In a recent article published in Nature Communications, researchers discuss 7DW8-5, a glycolipid that utilizes the body's non-specific immune response to quickly combat viral infections, including the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in vivo. Study: An immunostimulatory glycolipid that blocks SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza infections in vivo. Image Credit: luminance studio / Shutterstock.com Background Despite the widespread destruction caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a massive scientific response to generate and implement countermeasures against the transmission of the causative severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). For example, several prophylactic vaccines, which were developed by harnessing the power of the acquired immune system , remain highly effective against symptomatic infection. Nevertheless, vaccine-breakthrough infections rose in frequency due to the continued spread of SARS-CoV-2 and evolution of viral variants. Thus, the development of novel preventive measures could reduce the transmission of SARS-CoV-2, such as those that utilize the host's innate immune system and facilitate quick infection control. Natural killer T (NKT) cells, a vital component of the non-specific immune response, play a role in autoimmune diseases and cancer and protect against infections. Numerous studies demonstrated the significance of invariant NKT (iNKT) cells against viral infections like those caused by retroviruses, cytomegalovirus (CMV), influenza, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), as well as the function of NKT cells in adaptive immune responses against viruses. About the study In the current study, researchers evaluate the cluster of differentiation 1 (CD1d)-iNKT cell-dependent impact of an immunostimulatory glycolipid termed 7DW8-5 in preventing RSV, influenza virus, and SARS-CoV-2 infections in animal models. To this end, 7DW8-5 was used to stimulate the host's non-specific immune response to manage viral infections in vivo. The efficiency of the glycolipid in blocking viral infections was tested in hamsters and mice infected with the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant, as well as the Omicron BA.5 and BA.1 subvariants, in addition to the influenza virus and RSV. The Omicron subvariants were evaluated in wild-type mice, while the Delta variant was analyzed in keratin 18-human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (K18-hACE2) transgenic mice. The mechanism of action of 7DW8-5 in blocking viral infections was assessed through various techniques, including messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) sequencing, single-cell RNA sequencing, and in vitro inhibition assays. Single-cell RNA sequencing and mRNA sequencing were conducted to analyze gene expression variations linked with 7DW8-5 glycolipid treatment. Study findings The results indicate that the 7DW8-5 glycolipid could be employed to boost the host's innate immune system to manage viral infections in vivo. Moreover, intranasal 7DW8-5 administration before viral exposure significantly prevented infection by RSV, influenza virus, as well as the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant, and Omicron BA.5 and BA.1 subvariants in hamsters and mice. The protective antiviral impact of 7DW8-5 was both mechanism-specific and host-directed, necessitating interferon (IFN)-γ and CD1d molecules. Related StoriesOne in four healthy young Marines report long-term physical, cognitive, or psychiatric effects after mild COVID-19Public trust in COVID-19 vaccine science influences vaccine uptake in the USNew study reveals long-term brainstem damage in COVID-19 survivors using advanced MRI scansThe mechanism of action of 7DW8-5 involves binding to CD1d on antigen-presenting cells and inducing NKT cells to release a series of chemokines and cytokines. The upregulation of genes were implicated in the non-specific immune response, particularly IFN-stimulated genes, was linked to the 7DW8-5-mediated protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Additionally, 7DW8-5-mediated SARS-CoV-2 protection was observed in both humans and mice. In vitro SARS-CoV-2 infection of a human hepatocarcinoma cell line, Huh7 cells, was significantly inhibited by supernatants from CD1d-transfected Hela cells-stimulated human iNKT cell lines in the presence of 7DW8-5. However, this inhibition was eliminated following the addition of neutralizing anti-human IFN-γ antibody to the culture. The CD1d molecule is conserved between mice and humans. Furthermore, since CD1d-transfected Hela cells-stimulated human iNKT cell lines blocked SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro, humans may similarly benefit from the 7DW8-5-mediated SARS-CoV-2 protection established in mice. Conclusions The 7DW8-5 glycolipid was found to activate the non-specific immune system of the host to combat viral infections in vivo. More specifically, 7DW8-5 blocked influenza virus, RSV, and three distinct authentic SARS-CoV-2 variants infections in hamsters and mice. In addition, 7DW8-5-mediated SARS-CoV-2 protection was linked to the upregulation of genes associated with the non-specific immune reaction. Thus, a glycolipid such as 7DW8-5 that is inexpensive to manufacture and easy to administer may reduce the transmission of SARS-Cov-2 and address future pandemics before drugs or vaccines become available. Journal reference: Tsuji, M., Nair, M.S., Masuda, K. et al. (2023). An immunostimulatory glycolipid that blocks SARS-CoV-2, RSV, and influenza infections in vivo. Nature Communications 14. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-39738-1 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-023-39738-1 Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News | Disease/Infection News Tags: Angiotensin, Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2, Antibody, Antigen, Cancer, Cell, Cell Line, Chemokines, Coronavirus, Coronavirus Disease COVID-19, covid-19, Cytokines, Cytomegalovirus, Drugs, Enzyme, Evolution, Frequency, Gene, Gene Expression, Genes, HeLa Cells, Immune Response, Immune System, in vitro, in vivo, Infection Control, Influenza, Interferon, Molecule, Omicron, Pandemic, Respiratory, Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Ribonucleic Acid, RNA, RNA Sequencing, SARS, SARS-CoV-2, Severe Acute Respiratory, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, Syndrome, Transgenic, Vaccine, Virus Comments (0) Written byShanet Susan AlexShanet Susan Alex, a medical writer, based in Kerala, India, is a Doctor of Pharmacy graduate from Kerala University of Health Sciences. Her academic background is in clinical pharmacy and research, and she is passionate about medical writing. Shanet has published papers in the International Journal of Medical Science and Current Research (IJMSCR), the International Journal of Pharmacy (IJP), and the International Journal of Medical Science and Applied Research (IJMSAR). Apart from work, she enjoys listening to music and watching movies. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APASusan Alex, Shanet. (2023, July 11). Researchers identify glycolipid that blocks infection with SARS-CoV-2 and RSV. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 11, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20230711/Researchers-identify-glycolipid-that-blocks-infection-with-SARS-CoV-2-and-RSV.aspx.MLASusan Alex, Shanet. "Researchers identify glycolipid that blocks infection with SARS-CoV-2 and RSV". News-Medical. 11 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20230711/Researchers-identify-glycolipid-that-blocks-infection-with-SARS-CoV-2-and-RSV.aspx>.ChicagoSusan Alex, Shanet. "Researchers identify glycolipid that blocks infection with SARS-CoV-2 and RSV". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20230711/Researchers-identify-glycolipid-that-blocks-infection-with-SARS-CoV-2-and-RSV.aspx. (accessed November 11, 2024).HarvardSusan Alex, Shanet. 2023. Researchers identify glycolipid that blocks infection with SARS-CoV-2 and RSV. News-Medical, viewed 11 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20230711/Researchers-identify-glycolipid-that-blocks-infection-with-SARS-CoV-2-and-RSV.aspx. Suggested Reading Could vitamin D help COVID-19 patients? Meta-analysis highlights potential ICU reductionCanada’s proactive policies reduce drug shortages far more effectively than the U.S.Genetic risk factors for long-COVID uncovered in a large multi-ethnic studyThe long-term cardiac impact of COVID-19SARS-CoV-2 hijacks host proteins to escape immune clearanceMild COVID-19 disrupts brain connectivity and reduces memory function in adolescents and young adultsResearch links COVID-19 vaccines to temporary facial palsy in over 5,000 patientsStudy finds nirmatrelvir-ritonavir reduces severe COVID-19 and long COVID risks in high-risk patients Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersCDC updates pain care guidelines for clinicians Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsStudy shows how a single defective BRCA1 gene accelerates cancer developmentEarly RSV vaccination in pregnancy provides best protection for newbornsBloodletting therapy offers promising treatment for heat strokeTime-restricted eating shows promising weight and metabolic benefits, study revealsProlonged mental fatigue can impair self-control and increase aggression Newsletters you may be interested in COVID-19 (Subscribe or Preview) Genetics (Subscribe or Preview) Hepatology (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Monday 11 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × Leritrelvir shows high efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 protease mutationsRare case of co-infection: Avian flu and COVID can lead to pneumonia - The Jerusalem Post Advertisement JP Newsletter Israel News Health & Wellness WORLD NEWS Middle East Business & Innovation Opinion JP Store Login Log Out Archaeology Israel Real Estate Judaism Kabbalah Environment Antisemitism JP Spanish Podcasts JP Shopping Aliyah Portal Premium Jerusalem Post Health & Wellness Rare case of co-infection: Avian flu and COVID can lead to pneumonia This case highlights the significance of accurate diagnosis and timely treatment for co-infections involving respiratory viruses. By JERUSALEM POST STAFF JULY 12, 2023 02:33 Updated: JULY 12, 2023 15:46 SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus behind COVID-19 (Illustrative). (photo credit: fusion medical animation/unsplash) Researchers have identified a rare case of co-infection involving H5N1 avian influenza and the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), resulting in severe pneumonia. This discovery sheds light on simultaneous respiratory virus infections and underscores the importance of accurate diagnosis and timely treatment. The case involves a 52-year-old woman from China who retired to a rural area. She experienced an ongoing fever lasting eight days, along with worsening shortness of breath and decreased blood pressure. Detailed lung scans, known as computed tomography (CT) scans, revealed significant abnormalities, indicating severe lung damage and inflammation.Further investigation into the patient's medical history revealed that she had been in contact with sick poultry, suggesting that she contracted the H5N1 avian influenza virus directly from the infected birds. This highlights the transmission of H5N1 avian influenza from animals to humans. In addition to the CT scans, scientists analyzed the patient's bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), a sample collected from the respiratory system. The analysis confirmed the simultaneous presence of both H5N1 avian influenza and SARS-CoV-2, reinforcing the severity of the co-infection and the challenges it posed for the patient's health.The complexity of dealing with multiple respiratory viruses at once Cases of co-infection involving H5N1 avian influenza and SARS-CoV-2 are extremely rare, with no previous reports documented in scientific literature. This finding underscores the complexity of dealing with multiple respiratory viruses at the same time and the need for vigilance and preventive measures when in contact with birds and poultry. The COVID-19 vaccine (illustrative). (credit: PIXABAY)Diagnosing this co-infection presented challenges for medical professionals. Standard tests like throat swabs for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing were insufficient to accurately detect both H5N1 avian influenza and SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, scientists turned to analyzing the BALF, which proved critical due to the higher viral loads detected in this fluid.Prompt and appropriate treatment played a crucial role in improving the patient's condition. She received targeted antiviral and anti-inflammatory medications tailored to address both the H5N1 avian influenza and SARS-CoV-2 infections. This resulted in a significant reduction in lung inflammation and a more favorable prognosis, highlighting the importance of early intervention and appropriate medical care in managing severe respiratory viral infections. In conclusion, this case highlights the significance of accurate diagnosis and timely treatment for co-infections involving respiratory viruses. The patient exhibited a predominance of H5N1 avian influenza rather than COVID-19, underscoring the need for viral PCR analysis to identify the pathogen responsible for severe pneumonia.The case also emphasizes the importance of preventive measures to minimize animal-to-human transmission, particularly when in contact with birds and poultry. Further research is necessary to deepen our understanding of co-infections and develop effective strategies to protect public health.While these findings are significant, it is important to note that this study is currently undergoing peer review. Additional verification and analysis by the scientific community are necessary to confirm and expand upon these initial observations.Sign up for the Health & Wellness newsletter >> Related Tags health scientific study Virus research COVID-19 COVID Hot Opinion Change the climate: Israel’s environmental potential at COP29 and regional impact By JPOST EDITORIAL To recover, Democrats must expel anti-Zionist extremists who put off Middle America By AMOTZ ASA-EL Leaders of the Jewish enemies have always died as weak cowards By URI PILICHOWSKI How will the recent US election affect Iran, Russia, and North Korea? By LOUIS RENÉ BERES Israel cannot work with an organization that enables Hamas activities and terrorism By ZINA RAKHAMILOVA Most Read 1 Israel can't arm itself with 30,000-pound bombs in time against Iran 2 'We were ambushed': Pogrom in Amsterdam wounds several 3 102 years ago, one of the all-time greatest archaeological discoveries was made 4 Scientists unlock secrets of 3,000-year-old tablet revealing path to Noah's Ark 5 Trump’s victory throws diplomatic bombshell into Israel's multi-front war Advertisement Information About Us Contact us Feedback Terms Of Service Privacy Policy Subscriber Agreement JPost Jobs Cancel Subscription Sitemap פרסום בג'רוזלם פוסט Customer Service Advertise with Us The Jerusalem Post Group Breaking News World News Iran News MDA Heroes The Jerusalem Report Jerusalem Post Lite חדשות מעריב Real Estate Listings Hype Special Content JP Store BrandBlend Services Precious Metals Tools and services JPost Premium Ulpan Online JPost Newsletter Our Magazines Learn Hebrew RSS feed JPost.com Archive Digital Library Lists of Jewish holidays Law לוח חגים ומועדים 2024 זמני כניסת שבת Sites Of Interest Poalim Online JNF-USA The Jerusalem Post Customer Service Center can be contacted with any questions or requests: Telephone: *2421 * Extension 4 Jerusalem Post or 03-7619056 Fax: 03-5613699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 07:00 AM and 14:00 PM and Fridays only handles distribution requests between 7:00 AM and 12:30 PM For international customers: The center is staffed and provides answers on Sundays through Thursdays between 7AM and 14PM Israel time Toll Free number 1-800-448-9291 Telephone +972-3-761-9056 Fax: 972-3-561-3699 E-mail: subs@jpost.com Copyright © 2024 Jpost Inc. All rights reserved • Terms of Use • Privacy Policy Designed byFlu vaccine linked to reduced antibiotic use | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu Flu vaccine linked to reduced antibiotic use News brief Chris Dall, MA Topics Antimicrobial Stewardship Influenza Vaccines Pneumonia Share Copied to clipboard A systematic review and meta-analysis shows that influenza vaccination is associated with significantly reduced antibiotic use, while the effect of pneumococcal vaccination is less pronounced, Dutch researchers reported today in Antimicrobial Resistance and Infection Control. Reviewing literature published from 1998 through 2021, researchers from the Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research included 29 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and 69 observational studies in their meta-analysis. Most studies were performed in high-income countries in Europe and the Americas, and outcome measures included the proportion of people receiving antibiotics, the number of antibiotic courses or prescriptions per person, and days of antibiotic use. Results were stratified by global region and age-group. The RCTs showed that the effect of influenza vaccination on the number of antibiotic prescriptions or days of antibiotic use (ratio of means [RoM], 0.71; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.62 to 0.83) is stronger compared to the effect of pneumococcal vaccination (RoM, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.85 to 1.00) and confirmed a reduction in the proportion of people receiving antibiotics after flu vaccination (risk ratio [RR], 0.63; 95% CI 0.51 to 0.79). The effect of flu vaccination in Europe and the Americas ranged from 0.63 and 0.87 RoM to 0.70 and 0.66 RR, respectively. The evidence from observational studies supported these findings but presented a less consistent picture. These interventions need to be integrated into a multi-pronged strategy that takes into account all of the other factors that can reduce antibiotic use over time. The study authors say the stronger effect of the flu vaccine on antibiotic use is surprising, given that flu should not be treated with antibiotics and that the vaccine effectiveness (VE) of pneumococcal vaccines is considerably higher than the VE of influenza vaccines. Still, they say that both vaccines should be used as a possible public health intervention to address antimicrobial resistance. "These interventions need to be integrated into a multi-pronged strategy that takes into account all of the other factors that can reduce antibiotic use over time, such as antibiotic stewardship policies, raised awareness about rational antibiotic use through antibiotic campaigns and/or access to antimicrobials," they wrote. Zoo outbreak highlights human-to-animal COVID-19 risk News brief Stephanie Soucheray, MA Topics COVID-19 Coen Versluis / Flickr cc In a new report published in Eurosurveillance, Dutch investigators describe an outbreak of COVID-19 in gorillas and lions at the Rotterdam Zoo in late 2021, despite the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) by their zookeepers. SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in several zoo animals, likely caused by human-to-animal transmission. Such transmission has also been documented among domesticated and wild animals. Transmission dynamics must be understood, the authors of the study said, to assess spillover risk and protect animals from SARS-CoV-2 from a One Health perspective. The Rotterdam outbreak occurred during a 6-day period in November 2021, when multiple western lowland gorillas and Asiatic lions experienced fever, coughing and lethargy. Zookeepers had been wearing PPE since 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic began, and zoo visitors were required to show proof of vaccination, or a negative COVID test result to gain admission. Animal-to-animal spread likely, too Extensive testing of the animals and 19 staff deemed direct contacts and 21 staff deemed indirect contact suggested human-to-animal transmission. Genomic data of two zookeepers and the lions and gorillas clustered, which may indicate transmission between the animals and their zookeepers, the authors said. "We considered one or multiple asymptomatic infectious zookeepers, who may have had contact with each other in private settings or in the changing rooms, as the most likely outbreak source," the authors said. "Subsequent animal-to-animal transmission is likely given the high attack rate among the animals and the consistent PPE use of the zookeepers." Subsequent animal-to-animal transmission is likely given the high attack rate among the animals. Strict measures should be taken in zoos to protect against SARS-CoV-2 spillover events, the authors conclude. "It is crucial to adopt stringent prevention and control strategies to avoid introduction of respiratory pathogens in animal populations," they write. Study details diversity of factors influencing antibiotic resistance News brief Chris Dall, MA Topics Antimicrobial Stewardship CDC An analysis of data from 51 countries highlights the diversity of mechanisms driving antibiotic resistance (ABR), researchers this week in The Lancet Planetary Health. For the study, a team of researchers from France's Institut Pasteur analyzed count data of clinical isolates for 13 drug-bacterium pairs in 51 countries extracted from the ATLAS (Antimicrobial Testing Leadership and Surveillance) system from 2006 through 2019. Their aim was to evaluate ABR spatial-temporal dynamics and identify and compare the key mechanistic factors—including antibiotic sales, meteorologic and climatic variable, wealth and health metrics, and population density—associated with those factors. A total of 808,774 isolates from all infection sources were analyzed. For 2019, median ABR rates ranged from 6.3% for carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae to 80.7% for fluoroquinolone-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii, with variations across countries. The only resistance trend observed from 2006 to 2019 was for drug-bacterium pairs associated with carbapenem resistance, which increased in more than 60% of investigated countries. Key factors associated with ABR rates varied greatly among drug-bacterium pairs. Multivariable analyses identified significant associations of ABR with country-level antibiotic sales, but only in fluoroquinolone-resistant Escherichia coli, fluoroquinolone-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and carbapenem-resistant A baumannii. There was also a correlation between temperature and resistance in Enterobacteriaceae, between carbapenem-resistant A baumannii and gross domestic product, and with health system quality for all drug-bacterium pairs except Enterococci and Streptococcus pneumoniae pairs Resistances are driven by both individual behaviours and global environmental mechanisms. The authors of the study say the findings show that ABR is a "plural threat." "Despite differences across pathogens, resistances are driven by both individual behaviours and global environmental mechanisms setting ABR in a One Health framework," they wrote. "Therefore, strategies to tackle worldwide antibiotic resistance should be tailored accounting for the species, the resistance, and the epidemiological settings at stake." CDC ends probe of Salmonella cases tied to Papa Murphy's cookie dough News brief Jim Wappes Topics Salmonella Foodborne Disease my_amii / Flickr cc After 26 cases and 4 hospitalizations in six states, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) yesterday declared its investigation over into a Salmonella outbreak tied to raw cookie dough sold at Papa Murphy's pizza outlets. The CDC noted an increase of 8 cases and 2 hospitalizations since it first reported the outbreak in May. Patients range in age from 14 to 81 years, with a median age of 48. Of the 26 patients, 21 (81%) are female. Illness-onset dates range from February 24 to May 28. None of the illnesses proved fatal. Oregon reported the most cases (8) followed by Washington (6), Idaho (5), Utah (4), California (2), and Missouri (1). The true number of sick people in this outbreak was likely much higher. "The true number of sick people in this outbreak was likely much higher than the number reported, and the outbreak may not have been limited to the states with known illnesses," the CDC said. "This is because many people recover without medical care and are not tested for Salmonella." Dough should not be eaten raw Of the 22 case-patients interviewed, 17 reported eating food from Papa Murphy's. Of those, 15 ate Papa Murphy's raw chocolate chip cookie dough or raw s'mores bars dough, and 1 person ate baked chocolate chip cookies made from Papa Murphy's dough. Papa Murphy's temporarily stopped selling its raw dough on May 23 in response to the outbreak. And the CDC said that, as of July 13, the chain has not restarted sales of cookie dough and is reviewing its dessert labels to make it clear to customers that such products are not intended to be eaten raw. A fourth of Kansas City school nasal swabs test positive for respiratory viruses, study finds News brief Jim Wappes Topics Enterovirus, Non-Polio Public Health Surveillance at a large school district in Kansas City, Missouri, found that 25% of nasal swabs from students and staff tested positive for common non-COVID respiratory viruses, according to a study today in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. To determine the prevalence of respiratory viruses in school students and staff members, researchers tested samples from a large school district in Kansas City that includes 33 pre-kindergarten (pre-K) through grade 12 schools during the 2022-23 school year. Among the 894 study participants, 639 (71.5%) were students (representing 3.0% of total district enrollment), and 255 (28.5%) were staff members (representing 7.1% of the total). Researchers tested 3,232 surveillance specimens, including 872 (27.0%) from staff and 2,360 (73.0%) from students. Among 2,393 completed surveys, pre-K students reported the highest prevalence of having one or more symptoms—41.1%—compared with 14.0% among high school students. Rhinovirus, enterovirus most common Overall, 805 specimens (24.9%) tested positive for any virus (95% confidence interval, 23.4% to 26.4%). A substantially higher percentage of pre-K specimens tested positive (40.0%) compared with staff member specimens (14.1%). Among all samples, rhinovirus or enterovirus was most common (found in 12.1% of samples), followed by seasonal coronaviruses (5.6%). It is important to implement strategies to prevent and reduce the spread of infectious diseases. The study authors conclude, "It is important to implement strategies to prevent and reduce the spread of infectious diseases, including staying up to date with recommended vaccinations, including COVID-19 and influenza vaccines, practicing good hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette, staying home when sick, and improving indoor ventilation." Quick takes: Global mpox cases, UK measles threat, polio in Africa News brief Lisa Schnirring Topics Mpox Measles Polio In an update on global mpox activity today, the World Health Organization (WHO) said it received reports of 316 more cases, along with 2 more deaths, since its last update on June 24. Cases for the week ending July 9 were up 9.2% compared to the week before. Though cases continue at a low level in most of the world, Southeast Asia is experiencing a significant rise linked to activity in Thailand. The WHO also noted that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported a steady rise in suspected and confirmed infections since 2022, with sequencing suggesting that all viruses are related to clade 1, which is different than the clade 2 virus fueling the global outbreak. Tests on 156 samples from wild animals this year show that 64% were positive, though none were linked to zoonotic spillovers. Measles cases in the United Kingdom have risen steadily this year, with 126 infections reported so far, compared with 54 for all of 2022, the UK Health Security Agency said today. In a new risk assessment, it said modeling suggests that London is at most risk and without increases in measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccination rates, the city faces the risk of an outbreak that could reach 40,000 to 160,000 cases. Four African countries reported more polio cases this week, all involving circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) said in its latest weekly update. The countries are Benin, the Central African Republic (CAR), Kenya, and Niger. Benin's cases were added to its 2022 total, which is now at 13. The CAR cases were from three locations, pushing its total for the year to 10. Kenya's has 3 new cases, which are its first of the year and are genetically related and linked to a virus circulating in neighboring Somalia. Niger had 1 case that was added to its 2022 total, which is now 16. ALL BRIEFS In case you missed it Previous Next Last patient discharged from treatment in Rwanda’s Marburg outbreak WHO: mpox plateaus in a DRC hot spot, rises in other African countries Arkansas, Montana report CWD infections in deer, elk Africa CDC launches trial of smallpox drug for mpox CDC reports slight flu rise in children, first kid's flu death of season CDC tracks rise in pertussis activity Quick takes: Polio in 7 countries, lab monkey escape, pneumonic tularemia in Colorado Surveillance turns up 18 previously undetected cases of tick-borne Yezo virus in China This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Grant support for ASP provided by Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateGirl, 11, dies with influenza B on Queensland's Sunshine Coast - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeGirl, 11, dies with influenza B on Queensland's Sunshine CoastShare Girl, 11, dies with influenza B on Queensland's Sunshine CoastBy Janelle Miles and state political reporter Kate McKennaTopic:InfluenzaWed 12 Jul 2023Wednesday 12 July 2023Wed 12 Jul 2023 at 6:11amThe child was admitted to the Sunshine Coast University Hospital. (ABC News: Jonathan Hair)abc.net.auews/child-dies-after-flu-infection-in-queensland/102592880Link copiedShareShare articleA Queensland girl has died with the flu, with the state's Chief Health Officer John Gerrard issuing an impassioned plea for people to get vaccinated.The ABC understands the 11-year-old died last week in the Sunshine Coast University Hospital after contracting influenza B.It comes after a teenage girl died of influenza B on the New South Wales Central Coast.Dr Gerrard said that this month 78 children aged six months to four years had been in hospital in Queensland with flu – 50 of them diagnosed with the B strain.When to seek medical help for your child:An increase in listlessness, lethargy, drowsiness and irritabilityTrouble breathingMottled skinPoor fluid intakeComplaints of severe painSource: NSW Chief Paediatrician Matthew O'Meara"Only one of these children was vaccinated," he said.Another 11 babies aged under six months have also been admitted to hospital this month with the flu, eight of them with influenza B."Influenza B is causing severe illness in otherwise healthy Queenslanders, particularly in young people."We are concerned about the return of school that we may see transmission of influenza B in schools in the coming weeks," Dr Gerrard told the ABC."Influenza B is known to be associated with severe disease in children."Dr Gerrard said he was also worried about pregnant women contracting the flu, given the risk they may lose their baby. "This season we've had a number of pregnant women who've been on life support in intensive care and it's been quite striking how severe it's been this season so far," he said."Pregnant women are particularly prone to severe influenza because pregnancy is a state of relative immunosuppression."Influenza vaccine is very safe to give during pregnancy. We know that."So far this year, Queensland has recorded 47,300 flu cases, including more than 3,800 people who required admission to hospital.Dr Gerrard blamed the COVID-19 pandemic for this season's "pattern of virus disruption"."There'll be children who have never been exposed to influenza B virus because of the events of the last three years," he said."It is particularly important for children and pregnant women to get the vaccine at present."Sunshine Coast Health said clinicians were providing support to the family of the child who died."We would like to extend our sincere sympathies to the family during this extremely difficult time," a statement said."This experience is heartbreaking for everyone involved."Sunshine Coast Health protects the privacy and confidentiality of the patients who access our services and won't comment on the individual circumstances of care."Posted Wed 12 Jul 2023 at 6:11amWednesday 12 Jul 2023 at 6:11amWed 12 Jul 2023 at 6:11am, updated Wed 12 Jul 2023 at 7:50amWednesday 12 Jul 2023 at 7:50amWed 12 Jul 2023 at 7:50amShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsPhoto shows Barron Trump and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in a split screen image. Four foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Photo shows Four people walk in the shallows of a coastline, with white backs slung over their shouldersRex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upLIVEPhoto shows A Regional Express (REX) aircraft unloads at Charleville Airport in south-west Queensland.Donald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorPhoto shows SuperannuationRelated storiesWell-loved year 9 girl dies weeks after catching influenzaTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A large brick building bearing an emblem and the name "St Joseph's Catholic College".Parents urged to vaccinate children after spike in influenza cases, hospital admissions Topic:Infant HealthPhoto shows A young child gets there nose blown. Related topicsBirtinyaDeath and DyingInfluenzaTop StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsFour foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Rex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upTopic:Stock MarketDonald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorJust InCosmic coincidence leads NASA scientists to believe Uranus could support lifeTopic:Planets and Asteroids17m ago17 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:50amLED lighting on surfboards may deter great white sharks from attacking surfersTopic:Shark Attacks30m ago30 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:38am'Today was the day': Almost eight years after Abby and Libby were murdered, a jury hands down a guilty verdictTopic:Homicide42m ago42 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:25amPlans to extend anti-protest laws in NSW labelled 'a rampage against free speech' by climate activistsTopic:Demonstrations6m ago6 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 3:01amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCWhat is Influenza A and B, the illness that's killed two children this year | SBS NewsSBSSBSNewsAudioLanguagesWhat's OnGuideFoodIndigenousSportMoreLogin/Sign upHelp CentreSearchNavigate to SBS on demandSBS NewsHealthTwo children have died from the flu this year. Why aren't people getting vaccinated?Millions fewer Australians have been vaccinated for the flu this year. Experts say while it might not feel like a threat, it's a "potentially lethal infection".Health authorities are urging Australians to get vaccinated following the deaths of two young people from influenza B. Source: Getty / Marco VDMKEY POINTSTwo children have died from the flu, and more than 1,230 people have been hospitalised with the illness this year. Experts have urged people to get flu jab amid a fall in vaccination rates.One expert says lower vaccination rates could be because of vaccine fatigue.The deaths of two children from a strain of influenza have sparked urgent calls for people to roll up their sleeves and get vaccinated.An 11-year-old Sunshine Coast girl died on Wednesday, which followed the death of a student on NSW's Central Coast on Tuesday just days after health officials urged the community to get vaccinated.Both had contracted influenza B.Doctors are reporting increased flu cases and hospitalisations amid lower vaccination rates compared to last year.What is influenza and what are the symptoms?Professor Frank Beard, associate director at the National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance, said influenza is an infection caused by a virus. Beard said the two main types are influenza A and B, and symptoms can include high fever, sore throat, blocked nose, aches and pains, and tiredness.READ MORECould this new vaccine mean the end of annual flu jabs?"There's a lot of other viruses that can cause similar symptoms but tend not to be as serious as influenza which can cause complications like pneumonia, inflammation of the heart, inflammation of the nervous system," he said.Dr Kirsty Short, a virologist at the University of Queensland, said there are distinct differences between the two strands of influenza."We just have what we would call two lineages of influenza B, where there is a plethora of influenza A," she said."The other thing about influenza B is that we don't worry about it from a pandemic point of view because it doesn't really spill from animals into humans, it's really a human-specific thing."Is influenza serious for children?As of 25 June, there had been 1,236 flu hospitalisations in Australia and 107 deaths, according to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System.The data shows influenza rates have been highest in people aged 5 to 9 years old, followed by those aged 0 to 4 years old, and those aged 10-14 years.Some 69 per cent of people admitted with confirmed influenza across hospitals were children aged younger than 16 years.Last week, New South Wales emergency departments recorded a 37 per cent increase in patients with flu-like illnesses, with more than half of them aged under 16.Since May, 16 children in the state have been admitted to intensive care at three major hospitals with life-threatening complications from flu, including serious heart, brain, and muscle-related issues.Do children need to get vaccinated for influenza?NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant has issued a warning about the seriousness of the viral disease, especially for young people.Chant urged parents to get their children vaccinated before school returns."What we're actually seeing this year is a significant impact on our 5 to 16-year-olds or our school-aged children," she said. "This is in part related to the type of influenza that is circulating, influenza B, and that type tends to be associated with a greater impact on school-aged children."NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant has urged people to get vaccinated for influenza. Source: AAP / Joel CarrettProfessor Beard said higher rates of influenza B in young people could be caused by a lack of immunity."The concern in children would be because there wasn't any influenza B circulating last year, and there wasn't any influenza at all in 2020 and 2021," he said."(This) means that children would be more likely not to be exposed to influenza B before, as opposed to adults who have had various infections over the years, including A and B, and also vaccination which can contribute to immunity as well."Professor Beard said influenza should be treated as the serious and life-threatening disease it can be.READ MOREWhat to know about the gastro superbug that has one state on alert"Influenza can still cause severe disease and death in healthy adults (and) healthy children, which is why we recommend people get vaccinated every year because influenza is a potentially lethal infection," he said. "Vaccination is even more strongly recommended for people who are in those particularly high-risk groups - like smaller children, older adults, and people with medical conditions."But it's recommended across the board because it can still be a nasty disease."Why aren't Australians getting vaccinated?Nearly 2 million fewer Australians have received an influenza vaccination this year compared to the same March to July period last year.According to the Australian Immunisation Register, 8.5 million Australians received influenza shots in the period from the beginning of March to 9 July this year.READ MOREPlastic may not be so fantastic for those hoping for babies. Here's whyThat's compared to the more than 10 million Australians who received the vaccine over the same period last year.Vaccine fatigue could be one of the reasons behind this decline, Dr Short said."We've gone through a lot over the past few years, and been asked to get a lot of vaccinations and a lot of boosters, and maybe the flu doesn't feel like such a threat," she said. "But it is really important to get vaccinated every year because the vaccine gets updated annually."She said this is particularly important for very young children aged under five, elderly people, and those who are immunocompromised.The influenza vaccine is free under the National Immunisation Program for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people from six months of age; children aged six months to under five years; pregnant women; people aged 65 or over; and people with certain medical conditions.Otherwise, it can cost between $20 and $30 at a pharmacy.- With the Australian Associated Press.Share5 min readPublished 14 July 2023 5:44amUpdated 14 July 2023 10:21amBy Catriona StirratSource: SBS, AAPAvailable in other languagesTagsHealthVaccinationAustraliaShare this with family and friendsCopy linkShareRecommended for youWho is Susie Wiles, the 'Ice Maiden' who will become Trump's chief of staff?politics of united statesThe disease that's now overtaken COVID-19 as the world's top infectious killertuberculosisAustralians are obsessed with Japan, but a new travel hotspot is emergingtravel and tourismAn OnlyFans content creator planned to go to Schoolies. Now her visa has been axedschooliesUS presidential election results: What we know so far2024 united states presidential election'Remarkable courage': Principal speaks as student who died in schoolyard crash identifiedcar accidentsThis group has the highest Long COVID diagnosis rates. But that's not the whole storycoronavirus pandemicWhat happens if neither Kamala Harris nor Donald Trump wins 270 Electoral College votes?politicsGet SBS News daily and direct to your InboxSign up now for the latest news from Australia and around the world direct to your inbox.Your email address *Morning (Mon–Fri)Afternoon (Mon–Fri)WeekendSubscribeBy subscribing, you agree to SBS’s terms of service and privacy policy including receiving email updates from SBS.Follow SBS NewsfacebookX (Twitter)instagramyoutubetiktokrssDownload our appsSBS NewsiOSAndroidSBS AudioiOSAndroidSBS On DemandiOSAndroidListen to our podcastsSBS News UpdateAn overview of the day's top stories from SBS NewsSBS News In DepthInterviews and feature reports from SBS NewsSBS On the MoneyYour daily ten minute finance and business news wrap with SBS Finance Editor Ricardo Gonçalves.SBS News in Easy EnglishA daily five minute news wrap for English learners and people with disabilityGet the latest with our News podcasts on your favourite podcast apps.Watch on SBSSBS World NewsTake a global view with Australia's most comprehensive world news serviceWatch nowWatch the latest news videos from Australia and across the worldExplore SBSSBS HomeSBS On DemandNewsAudioLanguagesWhat's OnTV & Radio GuideFoodIndigenousSportVoicesTeaching ResourcesLanguagesالعربية/Arabic普通话/Mandarin廣東話/CantoneseTiếng Việt/Vietnamese한국어/KoreanSee all languagesContact SBS1800 500 727 (toll free)Help CentreLocked Bag 028, Crows Nest NSW 1585Follow SBSCopyrightTerms & ConditionsPrivacyYour online preferencesSales & AdvertisingComplaintsSBS Code of PracticeCareersAbout usSBS acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of Country and their connections and continuous care for the skies, lands and waterways throughout Australia.Philippines President reports progress on avian flu vaccination | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseBroilers & TurkeysDiseases & HealthPhilippines president reports progress on avian flu vaccinationOfficials are finalizing protocols for the administration of the vaccine.Jackie LindenJuly 10, 2023Bukhanovskyy I shutterstock.comIn the Philippines, the government is making progress on the procurement of a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) vaccine, according to President Ferdinand R. Marcos Jr.He was addressing the Livestock and Aquaculture Philippines 2023 event last week, reported Philippine News Agency. Furthermore, he said, officials are finalizing protocols for the administration of the vaccine.Over the past two weeks, the national authorities have retrospectively notified the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) about further HPAI outbreaks in poultry flocks.On the northern main island of Luzon, a further 50 outbreaks linked to the H5N1 HPAI virus were confirmed. Affecting around 162,000 birds, these began between November of last year and the end of April. They bring to 249 the total number of outbreaks in Luzon since the start of last year. Directly involved have been almost 2.08 million poultry, based on WOAH notifications.In February of 2022, the same virus variant was detected for the first time on the southern main island, Mindanao. Since then, the Philippines’ authorities have informed WOAH about 27 outbreaks that have directly involved more than 102,000 poultry. The most recent outbreak in this area started in January at a farm with 2,251 ducks in the province of Sultan Kudarat. Furthermore, poultry at one location on Luzon tested positive for the H5N6 HPAI virus variant back in January. The situation has subsequently been declared as “resolved.”According to a separate notification to WOAH, just one outbreak occurred. Affected were 2,200 ducks belonging to a backyard flock in Nueva Ecija. This province is in the Central Luzon region. The source of the infection is unknown, but is thought to be migratory birds, which were seen on nearby rice fields at the time of the outbreak.Between the two main islands of the Philippines lie several other regions. In one of these — Western Visayas — is Capiz. According to PhilStar, this province has recently been declared free of avian flu. First cases there were confirmed in December.South Korea declares HPAI resolved in wild birdsTo WOAH, the nation’s veterinary authority has recently declared the HPAI situation in wild birds “resolved.” This applies to both the H5N8 and H5N1 virus serotypes.First cases linked to the H5N8 variant were detected in the country’s wild population in October of 2020. Just over 400 cases were reported at 248 locations across much of South Korea. In January of 2022, the outbreak was reported as ended.In October of 2021, first cases of HPAI linked to the H5N1 virus serotype were registered with WOAH. Over the following months, 96 wild birds tested positive for the virus at 67 different places on the north, west and south of the country. This outbreak series was considered to have ended in April of this year.A month ago, the South Korean authority declared to WOAH that the HPAI situation was “resolved” in poultry. Applying to the H5N1 virus serotype, this also came into effect in mid-April.Following a 10-year hiatus, this serotype was detected again in the country in November of 2021. Between then and April of this year, HPAI directly impacted more than 8.85 million poultry in 122 flocks. Of these, 75 outbreaks were confirmed during the latest outbreak “season,” which ran from October of 2022 to April of 2023. According to the agriculture ministry in the latter month, these occurred in a number of different poultry types, including 30 flocks of meat ducks, and 23 of laying hens. Avian flu developments elsewhere in AsiaFollowing a six-month hiatus, the H5N1 virus serotype was detected again in Russia’s Magadan oblast in early June.According to the WOAH notification, four seabirds found dead tested positive for this virus. Source of the infection is unknown. Magadan is part of the Far Eastern federal district.From Japan comes confirmation of the presence of the same virus variant in one flamingo at a zoo in December of last year, and in a second red fox earlier this year.Last month, the Japanese authorities declared to WOAH that the H5N1 HPAI situation in poultry was “resolved”.At the end of June, Japan suspended all chicken imports from one state of Brazil. The move followed reporting of the country’s first HPAI outbreak in poultry, albeit a backyard flock.One more avian influenza infection in Chinese childIn the Western Pacific region, one new infections with influenza A virus of avian origin in China has been confirmed to the World Health Organization (WHO).Linked to the avian influenza A(H9N2) virus was a mild infection in a six-year-old girl in the southwestern province of Sichuan. Symptoms developed at the end of May, following the girl’s visit to a live poultry market. No members of the family showed signs of illness.This brings to 89 the number of lab-confirmed infections with this virus in the Western Pacific region reported to WHO since December of 2015. All but two were in China. Two of the patients died, likely due to pre-existing health conditions. A previous case — a baby boy – is reported to have fully recovered. View our continuing coverage of the global avian influenza situation.RecommendedLatest NewsNational Turkey Federation offering 'Thanksgiving 101' tips and recipesLatest NewsHormel Foods honoredRelated StoriesDiseases & HealthTyson Foods changes antibiotic use policyDiseases & HealthJapan suspends chicken imports from Brazil’s Espirito SantoDiseases & HealthPennsylvania renews recommendation to keep poultry indoorsDiseases & HealthBrazil notifies HPAI detected in backyard poultry flockMore in Diseases & HealthAvian InfluenzaAvian flu confirmed in poultry flocks in 13 European countriesThe H5N5 variant has been confirmed for the first time at a European poultry farm.Brand InsightsVaccination success depends on crew trainingZoetisContinuous evaluation and training are critical to improving pullet vaccination accuracy.Avian Influenza8 more British Columbia flocks struck by avian fluSo far in 2024, the province has had 22 commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus.Avian InfluenzaLatest Canadian HPAI infections involved variety of speciesOne more flock infection has been reported in Abbotsford, British Columbia.Diseases & HealthHow to reduce S. infantis risk in broiler productionThe incidence of Salmonella infantis has been rising in broiler flocks, but producers can take steps to minimize risk.Diseases & HealthAntibiotics leadership has enhanced the poultry industryWorking together, our members have not only gained greater influence but broad recognition.TurkeyHistomonosis transmission insights could improve treatmentThere are currently no approved drugs in the U.S. for the deadly turkey disease.Diseases & HealthNewcastle disease hits two more poultry farms in PolandNearly 60.000 birds among two flocks are lost.Avian InfluenzaHPAI hits 5 flocks in British Columbia, 1 in CaliforniaAPHIS provides additional information concerning two broiler flocks previously reported as confirmed cases.Avian InfluenzaAustralia commits more funds to H5N1 preparednessAustralian authorities add additional funds to surveillance, biosecurity, vaccines and communications in the face of possible H5N1 incursion.Avian InfluenzaAPHIS updates report on California HPAI casesFlock size numbers for two of four affected operations have been disclosed.Avian InfluenzaMore HPAI reported in California, British Columbia poultryBoth the state and the province have confirmed cases in two commercial flocks.Diseases & HealthUSDA approves use of European avian metapneumovirus vaccineThe National Turkey Federation supports import permit to improve treatment of the contagious respiratory disease.Page 1 of 226Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.Queensland girl, 11, dies after contracting influenza B amid surge in cases among children | Health | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/1Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal development Parents are being urged to vaccinate their children against the flu amid rising cases. Photograph: Media for Medical/UIG/Getty ImagesView image in fullscreenParents are being urged to vaccinate their children against the flu amid rising cases. Photograph: Media for Medical/UIG/Getty ImagesHealth This article is more than 1 year oldQueensland girl, 11, dies after contracting influenza B amid surge in cases among childrenThis article is more than 1 year oldSecond flu death recorded in past week after student died on NSW Central Coast Follow our Australia news live blog for the latest updates Get our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast Jordyn BeazleyWed 12 Jul 2023 11.53 BSTLast modified on Thu 13 Jul 2023 00.38 BSTShareAn 11-year-old Queensland girl has died after contracting influenza B amid a steep national rise in children being admitted to hospital with the virus.A spokesperson for Sunshine Coast university hospital, where she was admitted for care, said the tragedy was “heartbreaking for everyone involved”.“We would like to extend our sincere sympathies to the family during this extremely difficult time,” the spokesperson said.Flu cases spike: Australian parents urged to vaccinate children after steep rise in hospital admissionsRead moreThe girl is the second person to die in the past week with influenza after a student died on the New South Wales Central Coast.The Central Coast local health district confirmed the death on Tuesday, offering condolences to the student’s friends and family.There have been more than 152,000 confirmed cases of influenza this year.Last week, the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, urged parents to vaccinate their children against the flu amid rising cases among children in the state.“Sadly, our children’s hospitals are seeing an increasing number of these children being admitted for care and some of these patients are seriously unwell,” she told reporters last Thursday.Just 24% of children aged between six months to five years – and 14% of children aged five to 16 – were vaccinated against influenza nationally. This compares with 61% of those aged 65 and above.Since May, at least 16 children have been admitted to intensive care at three major NSW hospitals with life-threatening complications from influenza.Queensland’s chief health officer, John Gerrard, said the state had experienced an influenza A wave leading into winter, but influenza B had taken over as the dominant strain in July.Explore more on these topicsHealthQueenslandFlunewsShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal developmentNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Central Coast high school student dies after catching influenza B - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeCentral Coast high school student dies after catching influenza BShare Central Coast high school student dies after catching influenza BKBy Keira ProustABC Central CoastTopic:InfluenzaTue 11 Jul 2023Tuesday 11 July 2023Tue 11 Jul 2023 at 3:34amSt Joseph's Catholic College informed the school community of the news in a letter. (ABC Central Coast: Keira Proust)abc.net.auewssw-high-school-student-dies-after-catching-influenza-b/102586586Link copiedShareShare articleA teenage girl from the New South Wales Central Coast has died after contracting influenza B as cases continue to rise across the state.Key points:A young person has died in NSW after contracting influenza BIt comes as hospitals record a rise in admissionsHealth authorities are calling for parents to vaccinate their children against the virusParents with children at St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford have received a letter alerting them of the death of a year 9 student.The Central Coast Local Health District has confirmed the young person died after contracting influenza B.The ABC understands the student died on the weekend after contracting the virus several weeks ago.The letter stated that counselling is being offered to those affected."[She] was a well-loved student, thoughtful to the needs of others, a true friend and a valued member of our college community," the letter said."She will be missed."The ABC has contacted the Catholic Diocese of Broken Bay for comment.Health authorities are urging people to get vaccinated amid a spike in hospital admissions. (Supplied)Influenza cases risingReported influenza cases across the Central Coast and NSW have been rapidly increasing over the past month, NSW Health figures show.NSW Health Minister Ryan Park said the easiest way to protect children against viruses such as influenza was to get them vaccinated."We have seen a surge in influenza cases in NSW over the past few weeks, especially among children and teenagers," he said."Young children are considered to be at higher risk of severe illness from influenza and the best way parents can protect their kids is by getting them vaccinated."When to seek medical help for your child:An increase in listlessness, lethargy, drowsiness and irritabilityTrouble breathingMottled skinPoor fluid intakeComplaints of severe painSource: NSW Chief Paediatrician Matthew O'MearaChildren younger than five are eligible for a free flu vaccine from when they are six months old.Parents can get older children vaccinated by a GP or pharmacist.In most cases they will only pay the cost of the vaccine and service fees.NSW Health said a recent spike in influenza-related hospital admissions highlighted the need for parents to vaccinate their children.More than 21,000 children aged 14 and younger have contracted the virus since the start of the year, according to NSW Health records.That amounts to about half of all recorded cases in the state.Find more local newsBrowse for your location and find more local ABC News and informationPosted Tue 11 Jul 2023 at 3:34amTuesday 11 Jul 2023 at 3:34amTue 11 Jul 2023 at 3:34am, updated Tue 11 Jul 2023 at 5:54amTuesday 11 Jul 2023 at 5:54amTue 11 Jul 2023 at 5:54amShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsPhoto shows Barron Trump and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in a split screen image. Four foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Photo shows Four people walk in the shallows of a coastline, with white backs slung over their shouldersRex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upLIVEPhoto shows A Regional Express (REX) aircraft unloads at Charleville Airport in south-west Queensland.Donald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorPhoto shows SuperannuationRelated storiesParents urged to vaccinate children after spike in influenza cases, hospital admissions Topic:Infant HealthPhoto shows A young child gets there nose blown. From 32,000 to 68,000 cases in five weeks: Flu season is spiking early. Doctors say children could be at riskTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows Ada under a blanket on the couch looking miserable, while a cat sits on her lap.Related topicsGosfordInfluenzaTop StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsFour foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Rex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upTopic:Stock MarketDonald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorJust InCosmic coincidence leads NASA scientists to believe Uranus could support lifeTopic:Planets and Asteroids18m ago18 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:50amLED lighting on surfboards may deter great white sharks from attacking surfersTopic:Shark Attacks30m ago30 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:38am'Today was the day': Almost eight years after Abby and Libby were murdered, a jury hands down a guilty verdictTopic:Homicide42m ago42 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:25amPlans to extend anti-protest laws in NSW labelled 'a rampage against free speech' by climate activistsTopic:Demonstrations6m ago6 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 3:01amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCCentral Coast student dies days after contracting influenza, NSW health authorities say | Australia news | The Guardian Skip to main contentSkip to navigationClose dialogue1/1Next imagePrevious imageToggle captionSkip to navigationPrint subscriptionsSearch jobs Sign inIntInternational editionUK editionUS editionAustralia editionEurope editionThe Guardian - Back to homeThe GuardianNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleShow moreHide expanded menuNewsView all NewsWorld newsUS elections 2024UK newsClimate crisisUkraineEnvironmentScienceGlobal developmentFootballTechBusinessObituariesOpinionView all OpinionThe Guardian viewColumnistsCartoonsOpinion videosLettersSportView all SportFootballCricketRugby unionTennisCyclingF1GolfUS sportsCultureView all CultureBooksMusicTV & radioArt & designFilmGamesClassicalStageLifestyleView all LifestyleFashionFoodRecipesLove & sexHealth & fitnessHome & gardenWomenMenFamilyTravelMoneySearch input google-search SearchSupport usPrint subscriptionsSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsThe Guardian appVideoPodcastsPicturesNewslettersToday's paperInside the GuardianThe ObserverGuardian WeeklyCrosswordsWordiplyCorrectionsSearch input google-search SearchSearch jobsHolidaysDigital ArchiveGuardian LicensingAbout UsWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal development NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant last week warned circulation of influenza B was rising and urged parents to get their children vaccinated. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAPView image in fullscreenNSW chief health officer Kerry Chant last week warned circulation of influenza B was rising and urged parents to get their children vaccinated. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAPAustralia news This article is more than 1 year oldCentral Coast student dies days after contracting influenza, NSW health authorities sayThis article is more than 1 year oldDeath comes after state’s chief health officer warned young people were at heightened risk from flu strain Get our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast Australian Associated PressTue 11 Jul 2023 11.03 BSTLast modified on Thu 13 Jul 2023 00.40 BSTShareA student on New South Wales’s Central Coast has died after contracting the influenza virus, just days after health officials urged the community to get vaccinated.“Central Coast local health district can confirm the recent death of a local student from influenza,” a spokesperson said on Tuesday.“We offer our sincere condolences to the student’s family and friends at this difficult time.”‘Rollercoaster of a sickness’: how a horror flu season is catching Australian families off guardRead moreNSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, last week warned circulation of influenza B was rising and young people were at heightened risk from the strain.“Please get your children vaccinated during these school holidays. The vaccine is their best protection,” she said. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup A flu shot is available and showing positive protection against both influenza A and B strains.Since May, at least 16 children have been admitted to intensive care at three major NSW hospitals with life-threatening complications from influenza.These include serious heart, brain and muscle-related issues requiring the highest level of care.NSW chief pediatrician, Matthew O’Meara, said at the time it was fortunate there had been no flu deaths so far this year.“We are seeing cases rise,” O’Meara said on Thursday.“We expect there to be more children with influenza and more children with complications of influenza, so now’s the time to do something about it.”Explore more on these topicsAustralia newsNew South WalesHealthFlunewsShareReuse this contentMost viewedMost viewedWorldEuropeUSAmericasAsiaAustraliaMiddle EastAfricaInequalityGlobal developmentNewsOpinionSportCultureLifestyleOriginal reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morningSign up for our emailHelpComplaints & correctionsSecureDropWork for us Privacy policyCookie policyTerms & conditionsContact usAll topicsAll writersDigital newspaper archiveTax strategyFacebookYouTubeInstagramLinkedInXNewslettersAdvertise with usSearch UK jobsBack to top© 2024 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)Philippines President reports progress on avian flu vaccination | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseBroilers & TurkeysDiseases & HealthPhilippines president reports progress on avian flu vaccinationOfficials are finalizing protocols for the administration of the vaccine.Jackie LindenJuly 10, 2023Bukhanovskyy I shutterstock.comIn the Philippines, the government is making progress on the procurement of a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) vaccine, according to President Ferdinand R. Marcos Jr.He was addressing the Livestock and Aquaculture Philippines 2023 event last week, reported Philippine News Agency. Furthermore, he said, officials are finalizing protocols for the administration of the vaccine.Over the past two weeks, the national authorities have retrospectively notified the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) about further HPAI outbreaks in poultry flocks.On the northern main island of Luzon, a further 50 outbreaks linked to the H5N1 HPAI virus were confirmed. Affecting around 162,000 birds, these began between November of last year and the end of April. They bring to 249 the total number of outbreaks in Luzon since the start of last year. Directly involved have been almost 2.08 million poultry, based on WOAH notifications.In February of 2022, the same virus variant was detected for the first time on the southern main island, Mindanao. Since then, the Philippines’ authorities have informed WOAH about 27 outbreaks that have directly involved more than 102,000 poultry. The most recent outbreak in this area started in January at a farm with 2,251 ducks in the province of Sultan Kudarat. Furthermore, poultry at one location on Luzon tested positive for the H5N6 HPAI virus variant back in January. The situation has subsequently been declared as “resolved.”According to a separate notification to WOAH, just one outbreak occurred. Affected were 2,200 ducks belonging to a backyard flock in Nueva Ecija. This province is in the Central Luzon region. The source of the infection is unknown, but is thought to be migratory birds, which were seen on nearby rice fields at the time of the outbreak.Between the two main islands of the Philippines lie several other regions. In one of these — Western Visayas — is Capiz. According to PhilStar, this province has recently been declared free of avian flu. First cases there were confirmed in December.South Korea declares HPAI resolved in wild birdsTo WOAH, the nation’s veterinary authority has recently declared the HPAI situation in wild birds “resolved.” This applies to both the H5N8 and H5N1 virus serotypes.First cases linked to the H5N8 variant were detected in the country’s wild population in October of 2020. Just over 400 cases were reported at 248 locations across much of South Korea. In January of 2022, the outbreak was reported as ended.In October of 2021, first cases of HPAI linked to the H5N1 virus serotype were registered with WOAH. Over the following months, 96 wild birds tested positive for the virus at 67 different places on the north, west and south of the country. This outbreak series was considered to have ended in April of this year.A month ago, the South Korean authority declared to WOAH that the HPAI situation was “resolved” in poultry. Applying to the H5N1 virus serotype, this also came into effect in mid-April.Following a 10-year hiatus, this serotype was detected again in the country in November of 2021. Between then and April of this year, HPAI directly impacted more than 8.85 million poultry in 122 flocks. Of these, 75 outbreaks were confirmed during the latest outbreak “season,” which ran from October of 2022 to April of 2023. According to the agriculture ministry in the latter month, these occurred in a number of different poultry types, including 30 flocks of meat ducks, and 23 of laying hens. Avian flu developments elsewhere in AsiaFollowing a six-month hiatus, the H5N1 virus serotype was detected again in Russia’s Magadan oblast in early June.According to the WOAH notification, four seabirds found dead tested positive for this virus. Source of the infection is unknown. Magadan is part of the Far Eastern federal district.From Japan comes confirmation of the presence of the same virus variant in one flamingo at a zoo in December of last year, and in a second red fox earlier this year.Last month, the Japanese authorities declared to WOAH that the H5N1 HPAI situation in poultry was “resolved”.At the end of June, Japan suspended all chicken imports from one state of Brazil. The move followed reporting of the country’s first HPAI outbreak in poultry, albeit a backyard flock.One more avian influenza infection in Chinese childIn the Western Pacific region, one new infections with influenza A virus of avian origin in China has been confirmed to the World Health Organization (WHO).Linked to the avian influenza A(H9N2) virus was a mild infection in a six-year-old girl in the southwestern province of Sichuan. Symptoms developed at the end of May, following the girl’s visit to a live poultry market. No members of the family showed signs of illness.This brings to 89 the number of lab-confirmed infections with this virus in the Western Pacific region reported to WHO since December of 2015. All but two were in China. Two of the patients died, likely due to pre-existing health conditions. A previous case — a baby boy – is reported to have fully recovered. View our continuing coverage of the global avian influenza situation.RecommendedLatest NewsNational Turkey Federation offering 'Thanksgiving 101' tips and recipesLatest NewsHormel Foods honoredRelated StoriesDiseases & HealthTyson Foods changes antibiotic use policyDiseases & HealthJapan suspends chicken imports from Brazil’s Espirito SantoDiseases & HealthPennsylvania renews recommendation to keep poultry indoorsDiseases & HealthBrazil notifies HPAI detected in backyard poultry flockMore in Diseases & HealthAvian InfluenzaAvian flu confirmed in poultry flocks in 13 European countriesThe H5N5 variant has been confirmed for the first time at a European poultry farm.Brand InsightsThink strategically in developing IBDV vaccination programsZoetisDeveloping vaccination programs for IBDV requires strategic use of several vaccine types.Avian Influenza8 more British Columbia flocks struck by avian fluSo far in 2024, the province has had 22 commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus.Avian InfluenzaLatest Canadian HPAI infections involved variety of speciesOne more flock infection has been reported in Abbotsford, British Columbia.Diseases & HealthHow to reduce S. infantis risk in broiler productionThe incidence of Salmonella infantis has been rising in broiler flocks, but producers can take steps to minimize risk.Diseases & HealthAntibiotics leadership has enhanced the poultry industryWorking together, our members have not only gained greater influence but broad recognition.TurkeyHistomonosis transmission insights could improve treatmentThere are currently no approved drugs in the U.S. for the deadly turkey disease.Diseases & HealthNewcastle disease hits two more poultry farms in PolandNearly 60.000 birds among two flocks are lost.Avian InfluenzaHPAI hits 5 flocks in British Columbia, 1 in CaliforniaAPHIS provides additional information concerning two broiler flocks previously reported as confirmed cases.Avian InfluenzaAustralia commits more funds to H5N1 preparednessAustralian authorities add additional funds to surveillance, biosecurity, vaccines and communications in the face of possible H5N1 incursion.Avian InfluenzaAPHIS updates report on California HPAI casesFlock size numbers for two of four affected operations have been disclosed.Avian InfluenzaMore HPAI reported in California, British Columbia poultryBoth the state and the province have confirmed cases in two commercial flocks.Diseases & HealthUSDA approves use of European avian metapneumovirus vaccineThe National Turkey Federation supports import permit to improve treatment of the contagious respiratory disease.Page 1 of 226Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.This biotech startup is revolutionizing flu combat with carbohydrates Skip to content Search for: Suggested Topics: Categories Browse by resource or article categoryResourcesReportsBiotech funding trackerBiotech deals trackerList of biotech eventsList of biotech grants List of biotech associationsCategoriesNews and TrendsIn-depthBest in BiotechPodcastsOpinionExpert AdviceSponsored The biggest private biotech investments in August 2024 Long non-coding RNAs: what’s behind the growing “dark genome” buzz? Sectors Browse by sectorApproachesAntibodyArtificial IntelligenceCAR-TCell TherapyCRISPRGene editingGene therapyGenomicsMicrobiomemRNA TechnologyT-cellsTherapeutic areasAgingAlzheimer'sCancerDiabetesMental health Grab your free report on 3D organoids and explore their future potential Six biotech companies that could revolutionize obesity treatments Drug Development Stay informed on the latest drug development updatesR&DResearchDrug DiscoveryClinical trialsRegulatory approvalBDFundingPartnershipsM&ATop biotech startupsWorld biotech leadersUSAU.K.FranceGermany Connect with decision-makers and researchers worldwide for collaborative opportunities More Learn more about LabiotechCompanyAbout UsOur Editorial CalendarCareersAbout our parent company InpartJoin UsContact Us Subscribe to our newsletter Advertise with us Subscribe Search for: Top Topics Cancer Gene therapy Artificial intelligence mRNA technology CRISPR CAR-T Categories Resources Reports Biotech funding tracker Biotech deals tracker List of biotech events List of biotech grants List of biotech associations Categories News and Trends In-depth Best in Biotech Podcasts Opinion Expert Advice Sponsored The biggest private biotech investments in August 2024 Long non-coding RNAs: what’s behind the growing “dark genome” buzz? Sectors Approaches Antibody Artificial Intelligence CAR-T Cell Therapy CRISPR Gene editing Gene therapy Genomics Microbiome mRNA Technology T-cells Therapeutic areas Aging Alzheimer's Cancer Diabetes Mental health Grab your free report on 3D organoids and explore their future potential Six biotech companies that could revolutionize obesity treatments Drug Development R&D Research Drug Discovery Clinical trials Regulatory approval BD Funding Partnerships M&A Top biotech startups World biotech leaders USA U.K. France Germany Connect with decision-makers and researchers worldwide for collaborative opportunities More Company About Us Our Editorial Calendar Careers About our parent company Inpart Join Us Contact Us Subscribe to our newsletter Advertise with us Podcast Reports Home In Depth AIS Biotech: startup employs carbohydrates to fight the flu AIS Biotech: startup employs carbohydrates to fight the flu By Roohi Mariam Peter 6 minutesmins July 11, 2023 6 minutesmins Share WhatsApp Twitter Linkedin Email Photo/Elena Resko Keen on discovering novel ways to tackle viral infections, AIS Biotech, a French company based in the Alps, aims to combat influenza, more commonly known as the flu, by leveraging the medicinal promise behind glycobiotechnology.A field that has been gaining momentum over the past decade, glycobiotechnology is the study of complex carbohydrates which has multifaceted applications in various fields including medicine, and is emerging as a frontier in transforming the landscape of bioscience.Carbohydrates, which are long chains of polysaccharides that are broken down by the body to produce energy, can be converted to create renewable energy, in a bid to lower our dependence on fossils, as it is the largest source of biomass on the planet. And more recently, its therapeutic potential has been grabbing attention.For instance, the breakdown of carbohydrates, accelerated by microbial enzymes, can not only be used to generate biomaterials but also pharmaceutical products. And to add to that, it could become a compelling method to fight infectious diseases.Battling the fluAffecting nearly five million people worldwide, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), the influenza virus is a seasonal epidemic that is characterized by chills, a sore throat, runny nose, body aches and fatigue. With over 500,000 deaths recorded yearly, severe cases can be fatal, particularly for those who have respiratory disorders, and are considered to be high risk.Founded a mere four months ago, AIS Biotech’s – where AIS stands for Anti-Infective Sugar – mission is to not simply treat these illnesses but to prevent them. For this, the startup has developed its drug candidate GlycoFlu. As the influenza virus enters the host cell by binding to a specific site on the surfaces of glycoproteins and glycolipid receptors of the host – after which, through the cellular process of endocytosis, the cell gulps the virus before it replicates itself – GlycoFlu is designed to thwart the initial binding process.The drug candidate is able to mimic the natural host surface oligosaccharide binding-site of Influenza viruses. As a result, it is capable of neutralizing the virus and preventing the attachment to host cell-surface complex sugars acting as receptors for cell infection, explained Aurelie Juhem, CEO of AIS Biotech.Juhem believes that curbing infection by saturating the pathogen’s receptors with synthetic oligosaccharides in order to inhibit the initial infection step – which is the binding of the pathogen to the host cell surface – is the way to go.“Cell surface oligosaccharides are the target of many pathogens,” said Juhem. “In our case, to develop our strategy for preventing infections, glycobiotechnology is a sustainable way to produce our tailor-made carbohydrate bioproducts that are the specific active ingredients of our innovative anti-infectives.”AIS Biotech: on the path towards sustainable pharmaThe young biotech has teamed up with the Center for Research on Plant Macromolecules CERMAV-CNRS for the development of GlycoFlu, which also aims to promote the production of environmentally friendly biopharmaceutical products. As the pharmaceutical industry is responsible for generating tens of thousands of metric tons of chemical waste, bioproducts like GlycoFlu could be a more sustainable alternative, to confront this looming problem.Juhem expressed that she was impressed by the highly efficient, cost-effective bioproduction process with lower environmental impacts when compared to chemical processes. “As a biologist, I’ve always been motivated by projects with a potential to impact patients in a positive way, and biotechnology is one of the most dynamic and innovative sectors. Indeed, in the last years, many scientific and technological advancements came from biotechnology, and in a large panel of applications such as energy, health, agriculture and food that are big challenges faced by the society,” said Juhem.Suggested Articles The biggest private biotech investments in May 2023 Biomaterials Are Making the Building Industry More Sustainable Expanding the world of biomarkers with proteogenomics Antimicrobial peptides: a promising class to tackle antimicrobial resistance Cytokine release syndrome: how pharma is tackling a 21st century disease Although GlycoFlu is a nascent technology and is still in the making, carbohydrate-based drugs have been around since the 1940s. Antibiotics like streptomycin and neomycin have been used to treat numerous bacterial infections including tuberculosis. The former works by disrupting the function of ribosomes – which is the site where protein synthesis takes place in a cell – in bacterial cells, which is similar to neomycin’s mechanism of action. And apart from these antibiotics, chemotherapy drugs like doxorubicin, more popularly known under its brand name Adriamycin, consists of a deoxy sugar obtained from a certain strain of Streptomyces bacteria. It halts the growth of cancer cells by blocking the enzyme topo isomerase 2, and is used in the treatment of various kinds of cancers including leukemia, lymphoma, neuroblastoma, sarcoma and Wilms tumor, among others.However, these anti-infectives and anticancer drugs are regarded as treatments against diseases and not preventative measures, unlike GlycoFlu. Currently in preclinical stages, GlycoFlu has undergone a proof of concept study in influenza models both in vivo – having examined a mouse model with the infection – as well as as ex vivo – on a human airway epithelium. Besides this, the company is advancing its analytical methods and scale-up manufacturing process.Could AIS Biotech’s GlycoFlu target other infectious diseases?While AIS Biotech’s attempt to target SARS-CoV-2 did not attain desirable results, as the sialosides (complex sugars) produced to create GlycoFlu is designed to only mimic those targeted by influenza viruses, the startup has identified other pathogens – which are yet to be disclosed as it is still being investigated – that can bind to sugar-based receptors. This means that the technology could become a wider platform addressing medical needs of patients affected by infectious diseases, through this novel mechanism. Juhem also pointed out that to specifically target a pathogen, say for example coronavirus, they have to prepare different bacterial strains that are able to produce sialosides correlating to the virus.Presently funded via bank loans, grants and personal investment, Juhem hopes that their first fundraiser, which is scheduled to take place soon, will aid in achieving the company’s first milestone.“AIS Biotech’s mission is to contribute to the fight against current and emerging infectious diseases,” said Juhem. “My hope for the future, as AIS Biotech’s CEO, is that GlycoFlu and our next drug-candidates will be effective in humans to contribute to the constant fight against current and emerging diseases.” Explore other topics: biotech startupInfectious diseaseinfluenza ADVERTISEMENT Newsletter Signup - Under Article / In Page"*" indicates required fieldsSubscribe to our newsletter to get the latest biotech news!Consent* I agree to receive Labiotech's newsletter and understand that my personal data will be processed according to the Privacy Policy.*Business email* NameThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Latest Articles Gene editing sector investment struggles: What’s driving the slowdown? How to negotiate your job offer in biotech How to succeed as a woman in biotech The biggest private biotech investments in October 2024 ADVERTISEMENT Suggested Articles Is Latin America becoming an investment hotspot for biotech and deep tech? The promise of antisense oligonucleotides in precision medicine The biggest private biotech investments in September 2024 Let’s Take a Closer Look at 7 Autoimmune Diseases Biotechs are Fighting to Treat DNA synthesis: tackling the main bottleneck in biology research Latest Articles Gene editing sector investment struggles: What’s driving the slowdown? How to negotiate your job offer in biotech How to succeed as a woman in biotech The biggest private biotech investments in October 2024 Subscribe to our newsletter to get the latest biotech news! Signup now Explore Labiotech Biotech news by sectorBiotech news by regionBiotech news by companyNews and TrendsIn DepthBest in BiotechReportsPodcastSite Map About Labiotech Advertise with Labiotech.euSubscribeContactEditorial calendar Our Other Brands Inpart Follow Us Instagram Twitter Linkedin Google News Youtube RSS Feed Newsletter Signup - Footer"*" indicates required fieldsSubscribe to our newsletter to get the latest biotech news!Business email* Consent* I agree to receive Labiotech's newsletter and understand that my personal data will be processed according to the Privacy Policy.NameThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Made with - Labiotech UG, All Rights Reserved -ImprintPrivacy PolicySurging bird flu cases may increase human infection risk, warn UN agencies & WOAH डाउन टू अर्थPrint EditionSubscribeHealthAgricultureWaterWasteClimateAirAfricaData CentreVideoGalleryYoung EnvironmentalistBookshopNewslettersSubscribeHealthAgricultureWaterWasteClimateAirAfricaData CentreVideoGalleryYoung EnvironmentalistBookshopNewsletters HealthSurging bird flu cases may increase human infection risk, warn UN agencies & WOAHUrge countries to strengthen disease surveillance and improve hygiene at poultry farmsHuman bird flu cases are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments. Photo for representation: iStockDTE StaffPublished on: 13 Jul 2023, 12:55 amCopiedThe recent surge in bird flu outbreaks among mammals could help the virus spread more easily among humans, United Nations agencies Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Health Organization (WHO) and World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) warned July 12, 2023. The agencies urged countries to strengthen disease surveillance and improve hygiene at poultry farms.A new H5N1 strain of bird flu explosively spread to new geographical regions earlier this year, the agencies said. The strain, which was highly contagious to wild birds, infected and killed a variety of mammal species and raised fears of a pandemic among humans. Read more: Bird flu pandemic threat as high as in 1997; focus on wild bird migration routes, say experts“Avian influenza viruses normally spread among birds, but the increasing number of H5N1 avian influenza detections among mammals — which are biologically closer to humans than birds are — raises concern that the virus might adapt to infect humans more easily,” the agencies said. Human bird flu cases are usually the result of direct or indirect exposure to infected live or dead poultry or contaminated environments. About 10 countries have reported cases of avian flu outbreaks in both land and sea mammals since 2022, including in farmed mink in Spain, seals in the United States, and sea lions in Peru and Chile. Outbreaks have been reported in 26 species and H5N1 was recently detected in cats in Poland.Some of these infected mammals may act as mixing vessels for influenza viruses, leading to the emergence of new viruses that could be more harmful to animals and humans, the agencies feared. However, only about half a dozen cases in people who had close contact with infected birds have been reported to the WHO and most of those have been mild.“We encourage all countries to increase their ability to monitor these viruses and to detect any human cases,” said Sylvie Briand, the director of epidemic and pandemic preparedness and prevention at the WHO. Read more: We should only worry about bird flu making us sick when we see human-to-human transmissionThe agencies urged countries to share genetic data of viruses from humans and animals in publicly accessible databases. They also suggested several measures to curb the spread of the virus: Enhancing biosecurity measures in farms and in poultry value chains and apply good hygiene practices Rapid detection, reporting and response to animal outbreaks Strengthening influenza surveillance in animals and humans Conducting epidemiological and virological investigations around animal outbreaks and human infections Encouraging collaboration between animal and human health sectors, among others A host of mammal species are known to be infected to date, like ferret, mink, several otter species, European badger, skunk and Virginia opossum.Felines like Amur leopard, Amur tiger, mountain lion, European polecat, lynx, bobcat, and domestic cats have been reportedly infected as well, along with red fox, coyote, racoon, racoon dog, South American bush dog, American black bear, brown Bear and grizzly bear.Read more: What is spillover? Bird flu outbreak underscores need for early detection to prevent the next big pandemicThe goose / Guangdong-lineage of H5N1 avian influenza viruses first emerged in 1996 and has been causing outbreaks in birds since then. Since 2020, a variant of these viruses has led to an unprecedented number of deaths in wild birds and poultry in many countries in Africa, Asia and Europe. In 2021, the virus spread to North America, and in 2022, to Central and South America. In 2022, 67 countries in five continents reported H5N1 high pathogenicity avian influenza outbreaks in poultry and wild birds to WOAH, with more than 131 million domestic poultry lost due to death or culling in affected farms and villages. In 2023, another 14 countries reported outbreaks.Read more: Bird flu virus cannot trigger human pandemic Human transit evidence of bird flu found in Indonesia H3N2 outbreak: Know this strain that caused two pandemics and is now an outbreak in India WorldHealthBirdBird speciesThe World Health Organization (WHO)Avian Flubird fluAvian flu outbreakAvian influenzaAvian influenza A (H7N9)Bird cullingFood and Agriculture Organization (FAO)world organisation for animal health (woah)Show CommentsRelated StoriesNo stories found. Follow UsSubscribeHealthClimateAfricaNewsVideoData CentreBookshopNewsletterIn-depthBlogs© Copyright Down To Earth 2024. All rights reserved.Powered by Quintype Down To Earth www.downtoearth.org.in INSTALL APPShots advised for some dogs after canine flu reported in Central Arkansas | The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette - Arkansas' Best News Source Skip to content Open sections menu Sections News Today's Paper Subscribe Email Newsletters Arkansas News Politics Crime Election Education Voter Guide LEARNS Guide Business Health Religion Immanuel Baptist Pine Bluff Commercial Nation & World News Obituaries Archives National Conventions Voter FAQ Weather Sports All Sports Razorbacks Recruiting Columns Wally Hall Columns UALR UCA ASU UAPB Outdoors High School Golf Betting Horse Racing NASCAR LR Marathon Opinion All Columns Columnists Editorials Rex Nelson John Brummett Brenda Looper Philip Martin Robert Steinbuch Mike Masterson Letters to the Editor Features Lifestyle Religion Cooking Plan it Janet High Profile Food & Dining Music Movies Televison Events Calendar Submit an event Postcard Past GAME: Guess the word from clues Weddings Media Photo Galleries Videos Arkansas 360 Daily Photos Podcasts Puzzles & Games Southern Fried podcast Arkies in the Beltway podcast Devil of Pope County podcast Chasing Ghosts podcast Hog Wild podcast Marketplace Classifieds Jobs Autos Real Estate Legal Notices Ads/Coupons Legal Notices Archive Extras Subscribe! Subscriber Help Donate Advertise Contact Us ADG Staff List Our Core Values FAQ iPad Covers ADG Store Promotions Special Pubs Best of the Best Event Wedding Show Pops on the River Job Fair Reader Rewards All Arkansas Preps Open user options menu Manage Subscription Sign Out Donate Sign In Subscribe Donate Today's Paper Home Local News Trump News HS Football Scores Podcasts Newsletters Obits Games Advertisement Advertisement Shots advised for some dogs after canine flu reported in Central Arkansas Vets advise shots for high-risk dogs July 9, 2023 at 7:31 a.m. by Tony Holt Veterinarian Mike Stanford (left) prepares to administer a vaccine as veterinary tech Savanna Behning holds Boo the dog at the Best Friends Animal Society of Northwest Arkansas in Bentonville in this May 10, 2023 file photo. (NWA Democrat-Gazette/Charlie Kaijo) Cases of the canine flu have been reported in Central Arkansas, and veterinarians recommend vaccinating dogs most at risk -- those that are kenneled, left at doggie day care, brought to dog shows or groomed at facilities with other dogs.Rene LaVergne, a Little Rock veterinarian who is the Central Arkansas District trustee for the Arkansas Veterinary Medical Association, said there have been five canine flu cases reported in Conway, one in Benton and another in Little Rock during the past couple of weeks."If your dog has the canine flu, you won't miss it," LaVergne said. "The symptoms are coughing, lethargy, sneezing and fever. You may see some eye or nose discharge, and the fever could get up to 104 or 105 [degrees]. With the worst cases, you may even see a fever as high as 106."LaVergne said roughly 20% of dogs that get the canine flu are asymptomatic, while the other 80% show some or all of the aforementioned symptoms. He described the virus as a "highly contagious" strain and said even those dogs that are asymptomatic can spread it. Death can occur from canine flu, but those cases are very rare, he said.Arkansas State Veterinarian John Nilz said canine influenza made its way to Northwest Arkansas in the spring and only recently spread to Central Arkansas."Canines have their own specific strains of the flu, and just like the human flu, it has its seasons and it can work its way through different regions," Nilz said. "Before it moved into Arkansas, we were seeing it work through other states like Oklahoma."Ohio State University's Veterinary Medical Center recently published several facts about the canine flu on its website. It states that there are two strains of the virus -- H3N8 and H3N2.The latter strain is the one that has been detected in Arkansas, LaVergne said.LaVergne said Dallas had a canine flu outbreak that began in June 2022, and a similar outbreak started in Oklahoma City about six months later. Those outbreaks lasted for about six months, he said.The Hounds Lounge Pet Resort and Spa, which offers boarding services for dogs in Little Rock, North Little Rock, Bryant and Fayetteville, announced in an email Thursday that the canine flu is present in Central Arkansas and advised dog owners to vaccinate their dogs.LaVergne said veterinarian offices across Arkansas have the vaccine available. After the first dose is administered, pet owners are advised to return three weeks later for a follow-up shot. Full protection from the canine flu is reached about two or three weeks after the second shot, LaVergne said.He described it as a "lifestyle vaccine for high-risk dogs." Considering an outbreak can last six months after the first sign of outbreak, those who plan to kennel their dogs during the holiday season are encouraged to vaccinate their dogs as soon as possible.The canine flu virus is persistent. LaVergne said it can live on countertops for up to 48 hours and on clothes for 24 hours.LaVergne also advises that if a dog has a cough or any other symptoms consistent with the canine flu, it should not be boarded at a kennel or interact with other dogs. An owner who suspects a dog might have flu-like symptoms needs to let the veterinarian know ahead of time so that the dog can be examined outside, he said.Dogs that have been diagnosed with the H3N2 strain should remain isolated from other dogs for 21 days, according to Ohio State University. Antibiotics are administered to those dogs that show signs of a secondary bacterial infection.Humans aren't infected by the canine flu, but they can contribute to its spread. They are advised to wash their hands if they come in contact with other dogs before coming in contact with their own pets.Cats can be infected, but their symptoms generally are not as severe, LaVergne said. Support journalism that digs deeper into topics that matter most to Arkansans. Donate today to preserve the quality and integrity of local journalism. Advertisement Advertisement Upcoming Events News Today's Paper Subscribe Email Newsletters Arkansas News Politics Crime Election Education Voter Guide LEARNS Guide Business Health Religion Immanuel Baptist Pine Bluff Commercial Nation & World News Obituaries Archives National Conventions Voter FAQ Weather Sports All Sports Razorbacks Recruiting Columns Wally Hall Columns UALR UCA ASU UAPB Outdoors High School Golf Betting Horse Racing NASCAR LR Marathon Opinion All Columns Columnists Editorials Rex Nelson John Brummett Brenda Looper Philip Martin Robert Steinbuch Mike Masterson Letters to the Editor Features Lifestyle Religion Cooking Plan it Janet High Profile Food & Dining Music Movies Televison Events Calendar Submit an event Postcard Past GAME: Guess the word from clues Weddings Media Photo Galleries Videos Arkansas 360 Daily Photos Podcasts Puzzles & Games Southern Fried podcast Arkies in the Beltway podcast Devil of Pope County podcast Chasing Ghosts podcast Hog Wild podcast Marketplace Classifieds Jobs Autos Real Estate Legal Notices Ads/Coupons Legal Notices Archive Extras Subscribe! Subscriber Help Donate Advertise Contact Us ADG Staff List Our Core Values FAQ iPad Covers ADG Store Promotions Special Pubs Best of the Best Event Wedding Show Pops on the River Job Fair Reader Rewards All Arkansas Preps Contact Us Advertise With Us Terms of Use Ethics Policy Copyright © 2024, Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, Inc. All rights reserved. This document may not be reprinted without the express written permission of Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, Inc. Material from the Associated Press is Copyright © 2024, Associated Press and may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. Associated Press text, photo, graphic, audio and/or video material shall not be published, broadcast, rewritten for broadcast or publication or redistributed directly or indirectly in any medium. Neither these AP materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except for personal and noncommercial use. The AP will not be held liable for any delays, inaccuracies, errors or omissions therefrom or in the transmission or delivery of all or any part thereof or for any damages arising from any of the foregoing. All rights reserved.Surging bird flu cases may increase human infection risk: WHOsupreme courtmaharashtra assembly pollsjharkhand assembly electionspm modi❯ E हिंঅবাংગુಕമमଓਪੰதతెار❯NationalEnglishहिंदीउत्तर प्रदेशउत्तराखंडछत्तीसगढ़झारखंडदिल्लीबिहारमध्य प्रदेशराजस्थानहरियाणाहिमाचल प्रदेशঅসমীয়াবাংলাગુજરાતીಕನ್ನಡമലയാളംमराठीଓଡିଆਪੰਜਾਬੀதமிழ்తెలుగుఆంధ్రప్రదేశ్తెలంగాణاردو Live Go Back To National HomepageSNIPPETSNATIONALWORLDSPORTSENTERTAINMENTLIFESTYLEHEALTHSTATEBUSINESSOFFBEATMoreLiveETV Bharat / sukhibhavaSurging bird flu cases may increase human infection risk: WHOWorld Health Organisation warns about the recent surge in bird flu outbreaks in mammals, as it can cause an easy spread among humans.Surging bird flu cases may increase human infection risk: WHOBy Published : Jul 13, 2023, 4:45 PM IST New Delhi: The recent surge in bird flu outbreaks among mammals could help the virus spread more easily among humans, the World Health Organization has warned. Avian influenza viruses normally spread among birds, but the increasing number of H5N1 avian influenza detections among mammals which are biologically closer to humans than birds raises concern that the virus might adapt to infect humans more easily.In addition, some mammals may act as mixing vessels for influenza viruses, leading to the emergence of new viruses that could be more harmful to animals and humans, the WHO said in a statement Wednesday. Recently, there have been increasing reports of deadly outbreaks among mammals also caused by influenza A(H5)including influenza A(H5N1)viruses. As many as 10 countries across three continents have reported outbreaks in mammals to World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) since 2022. There are likely to be more countries where outbreaks have not yet been detected or reported.Also read: Extreme heatwaves grips Southwest; posing challenges for Desert cities"There is a recent paradigm change in the ecology and epidemiology of avian influenza which has heightened global concern as the disease spread to new geographical regions and caused unusual wild bird die-offs, and alarming rise in mammalian cases, said Gregorio Torres, Head of the Science Department at WOAH. Sporadic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus detections in humans have also been reported, but remain very rare, with 8 cases reported since December 2021, WHO said.Infections in humans can cause severe disease with a high mortality rate. The human cases detected thus far are mostly linked to close contact with infected birds and contaminated environments, it noted. "With the information available so far, the virus does not appear to be able to transmit from one person to another easily, but vigilance is needed to identify any evolution in the virus that can change that," said Sylvie Briand, Director of Epidemic and Pandemic Preparedness and Prevention, WHO."We encourage all countries to increase their ability to monitor these viruses and to detect any human cases. This is especially important as the virus is now affecting countries with limited prior experience in avian flu surveillance," Briand added. Studies are underway to identify any changes in the virus that may help the virus to spread more easily among mammals, including humans. "The epidemiology of H5N1 continues to rapidly evolve," said Keith Sumption, Chief Veterinary Officer, FAO. (PTI) New Delhi: The recent surge in bird flu outbreaks among mammals could help the virus spread more easily among humans, the World Health Organization has warned. Avian influenza viruses normally spread among birds, but the increasing number of H5N1 avian influenza detections among mammals which are biologically closer to humans than birds raises concern that the virus might adapt to infect humans more easily.In addition, some mammals may act as mixing vessels for influenza viruses, leading to the emergence of new viruses that could be more harmful to animals and humans, the WHO said in a statement Wednesday. Recently, there have been increasing reports of deadly outbreaks among mammals also caused by influenza A(H5)including influenza A(H5N1)viruses. As many as 10 countries across three continents have reported outbreaks in mammals to World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) since 2022. There are likely to be more countries where outbreaks have not yet been detected or reported.Also read: Extreme heatwaves grips Southwest; posing challenges for Desert cities"There is a recent paradigm change in the ecology and epidemiology of avian influenza which has heightened global concern as the disease spread to new geographical regions and caused unusual wild bird die-offs, and alarming rise in mammalian cases, said Gregorio Torres, Head of the Science Department at WOAH. Sporadic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus detections in humans have also been reported, but remain very rare, with 8 cases reported since December 2021, WHO said.Infections in humans can cause severe disease with a high mortality rate. The human cases detected thus far are mostly linked to close contact with infected birds and contaminated environments, it noted. "With the information available so far, the virus does not appear to be able to transmit from one person to another easily, but vigilance is needed to identify any evolution in the virus that can change that," said Sylvie Briand, Director of Epidemic and Pandemic Preparedness and Prevention, WHO."We encourage all countries to increase their ability to monitor these viruses and to detect any human cases. This is especially important as the virus is now affecting countries with limited prior experience in avian flu surveillance," Briand added. Studies are underway to identify any changes in the virus that may help the virus to spread more easily among mammals, including humans. "The epidemiology of H5N1 continues to rapidly evolve," said Keith Sumption, Chief Veterinary Officer, FAO. (PTI) For All Latest UpdatesFollow Us TAGGED:WHOWorld Health Organisationbird fluhuman infection riskInfectionAvian influenzaLatestIndia Push For Accountability, Fair Financing, Green Credit At Cop29: DelegatesFight Over Including Carbon Border Tax In Agenda Delays Climate Talks On Day OneElon Musk's Pac Spent An Estimated $200 Million To Help Elect TrumpNorthern Railway Navigates Unprecedented Festive RushTrump's National Security Pick: Michael Waltz To Tackle Military And Global ThreatsFeaturedQuick Links / PoliciesCONTACT USABOUT USAUTHORSPRIVACY POLICYCODE OF ETHICSTERMS & CONDITIONSGet Us OnPlease write to us, for media partnership and Ad-sales inquiries. Email: adops@etvbharat.comFeaturedExplained: How Canada SDS Visa Helped Indian Students And Why Was It Stopped'Kashur Aenz', Lone Domestic Goose Species In India, Found Dead In Thousands In Kashmir's Wular LakeHow Doodles Got A Russian Art Teacher Locked Up For 20 YearsExplained: How SC Ruling On LMV Driving Licence Helps Drive Commercial Transport Vehicles Copyright © 2024 Ushodaya Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., All Rights Reserved.NSW flu death: Warning over influenza risks after Central Coast student diesWarning over flu risks after two children die with the virusWe’re sorry, this feature is currently unavailable. We’re working to restore it. Please try again later.DismissSkip to sections navigationSkip to contentSkip to footerOur networkOpen NavigationMenuThe Sydney Morning HeraldThe Sydney Morning HeraldcloseSearch SiteSectionsNetworkHomeSydneyNSWPoliticsShow subsectionsUS Votes 2024FederalNSWVictoriaQueenslandWestern AustraliaBusinessShow subsectionsCompaniesMarketsBulls N' BearsThe economyBanking & financeSmall businessMediaWorkplaceWorldShow subsectionsNorth AmericaEuropeAsiaMiddle EastOceaniaSouth AmericaAfricaNationalShow subsectionsVictoriaQueenslandWestern AustraliaOpinionPropertyShow subsectionsNewsDomain MagazineTitle DeedsLivingAuctionsFinancingSportShow subsectionsNRLRugby unionCricketSoccerAFLRacingTennisNetballBasketballMotorsportCyclingGolfNFLAthleticsSwimmingBoxingGood FoodShow subsectionsEating outRecipesTips & adviceDrinksCultureShow subsectionsMoviesTV & radioMusicCelebrityBooksComedyDanceMusicalsOperaTheatreArt & designLive reviewsTV guideLifestyleShow subsectionsHealth & wellnessFashionLife & relationshipsBeautyStyleHoroscopesTravellerShow subsectionsDestination guidesInspirationReviews & adviceTravel newsGood WeekendSpectrumSunday LifeMoneyShow subsectionsSuper & retirementInvestingBankingBorrowingSavingTaxPlanning & budgetingInsuranceEducationHealthcareEnvironmentShow subsectionsConservationClimate changeSustainabilityWeatherTechnologyShow subsectionsVideo gamesHome techPhonesGadgetsDrivePremiumSubscribeToday’s PaperGood Food GuideDaily PuzzlesMoreLettersEditorialCampusColumn 8ObituariesExplainersQuizzesPodcastsThe Sydney Morning HeraldThe AgeBrisbane TimesWAtodayThe Australian Financial ReviewDomainCommercial Real EstateDriveAdvertisementNationalNSWFlu seasonThis was published 1 year agoWarning over flu risks after two children die with the virusBy Angus ThomsonUpdated July 12, 2023 — 6.23pmfirst published at 12.36pmSaveLog in, register or subscribe to save articles for later.Save articles for laterAdd articles to your saved list and come back to them any time.Got itNormal text sizeLarger text sizeVery large text sizeAdvertisementParents are being warned about the risks of influenza as students prepare to return to the classroom, after a teenager from NSW and a girl from Queensland died with the virus.A Year 9 student at the all-girls St Joseph’s Catholic College on the NSW Central Coast died with the virus, the school confirmed on Wednesday.NSW Health Officer Kerry Chant speaks to the media in April about the influenza season in Sydney. Credit: Janie BarrettKatrina Lee from the Catholic Diocese of Broken Bay said counselling was available for students even through the holiday period.“Our primary concern at this time is for the family and the school community, which is why we ask that their privacy be respected at this very sad time,” she said.A letter sent to parents with children at the school described the teenager as “a well-loved student, thoughtful to the needs of others”.NSW Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant said it was the first known death of a child or young person from the flu in the state so far this year, and a timely reminder of the importance of vaccination as students head back to the classroom from Monday.“It’s not too late to get vaccinated, we’re still seeing flu cases on the rise,” she said. “What we often see is a bit of an uptick when school goes back, so we would urge parents to keep children home if they’re unwell.”Since May, at least 16 children have been admitted to intensive care at three major hospitals with life-threatening complications from the flu, NSW Chief Paediatrician Dr Matthew O’Meara said last Thursday.AdvertisementChant said she was aware of additional intensive care admissions since then, as more people present to emergency with flu-like symptoms.“Some of them will be left potentially with some lifelong disability associated with their influenza,” Chant said. “When we’ve been talking to people in the community or parents, there probably hasn’t been that awareness that influenza can impact all age groups.”Chant says the flu vaccination numbers for children are still too low.Credit: SAM MOOYFlu cases rose by 31 per cent in the previous reporting week to last Thursday, and young people accounted for 57 per cent of cases.As of July 7, 22.8 per cent of children between six months and five years of age, and 12.6 per cent of five- to 15-year-olds, were up-to-date with flu vaccinations. Chant said that was still too low.Loading“They’re lower than we’d like to see, given the amount of effort we’ve put into promoting vaccination,” she said. “For many, influenza will be a mild illness but for some, it will also be severe.”Chant urged parents to visit their GP or call the government’s free medical assistance helpline, Healthdirect, if their child contracts influenza and their symptoms are getting worse, not better.On Wednesday, it was reported an 11-year-old child from Noosa in Queensland died at Sunshine Coast University Hospital last week after contracting the flu.“This experience is heartbreaking for everyone involved,” a spokeswoman for the hospital said.The most recent data from NSW Health, from June 11, shows there have been 32 deaths in people of all ages attributed to influenza in 2023, though the agency expects the increase in cases over the past month to correspond with an increase in deaths.The Morning Edition newsletter is our guide to the day’s most important and interesting stories, analysis and insights. Sign up here.SaveLog in, register or subscribe to save articles for later.License this articleFlu seasonHealthcareCentral CoastEast GosfordAngus Thomson is a reporter covering health at the Sydney Morning Herald.Connect via Twitter or email.Most Viewed in NationalLoadingFrom our partnersLoading 3rd party ad contentLoading 3rd party ad contentLoading 3rd party ad contentLoading 3rd party ad contentAdvertisementThe Sydney Morning HeraldTwitterFacebookInstagramRSSOur SitesThe Sydney Morning HeraldThe AgeBrisbane TimesWAtodayThe Australian Financial ReviewDomainDriveClassifiedsTributesCelebrationsPlace your adCommercial Real EstateThe Sydney Morning HeraldContact & supportAdvertise with usNewslettersAccessibility guideSitemapPhoto salesPurchase front pagesContent licensingWork with usTerms of usePrivacy policyPress CouncilCharter of Editorial IndependenceProducts & ServicesSubscription packagesMy accountSubscriber FAQsDelivery statusToday’s PaperGood Food GuideDaily PuzzlesCopyright © 2024SubscribeFlu vaccine uptake is down, and experts say COVID 'fatigue' and cost-of-living are to blame - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeFlu vaccine uptake is down, and experts say COVID 'fatigue' and cost-of-living are to blameShare Flu vaccine uptake is down, and experts say COVID 'fatigue' and cost-of-living are to blameBy Stephanie RichardsTopic:InfluenzaWed 12 Jul 2023Wednesday 12 July 2023Wed 12 Jul 2023 at 9:27pmData shows 8.5 million Australians received flu vaccines between March and July, compared to 10.4 million for the same time last year. (Unsplash: CDC)abc.net.auews/flu-vaccination-rate-decline-blamed-on-cost-and-fatigue/102592152Link copiedShareShare articleHealth professionals say the cost-of-living crisis and vaccine "fatigue" are causing Australians to skip lifesaving jabs, with just 32 per cent of the population currently vaccinated against the flu.Key points:Data shows 8.5 million Australians received flu vaccines between March 1 and July 9That is almost 2 million less than the 10.4 million at the same time last yearChildren aged six months to five years are among the least likely to be vaccinated Two students have died from influenza this week, including an 11-year-old Queensland girl and a teenager from the New South Wales Coast.Australian Immunisation Register data shows 8.5 million Australians were vaccinated against influenza between March 1 and July 9 this year, compared to 10.4 million at the same time last year.Vaccination rates decreased in all states and territories, with the biggest drops recorded in South Australia (down 20.6 per cent), New South Wales (down 19.5 per cent), Victoria (down 18.9 per cent) and Queensland (down 18.6 per cent).Meanwhile, there have been 116,473 influenza notifications reported to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System between January 1 to June 25 this year.While health workers expected flu cases to surge after governments wound back COVID-19 social distancing and mask restrictions, they said this year's lower-vaccination rate meant the disease was spreading more rapidly through the community."The virus itself, less immunity naturally and less uptake in vaccines — all of those things combined together can make a pretty bad flu season," Royal College of General Practitioners SA chairperson Sian Goodson said."Unless the vaccine rate improves, we could be in for quite a large number of flu cases this year."Dr Goodson said the low vaccination rate was "concerning". (ABC News: Stephanie Richards)Influenza is a highly infectious respiratory viral illness that can result in breathing difficulties and pneumonia.To June 25, 1,236 Australians were hospitalised with the flu, of whom 80 were admitted directly to intensive care.In the same time period, 107 Australians died after catching the flu.Dr Goodson said the country's low-vaccination rate was "concerning" given how serious the disease could be."For people without underlying medical conditions, often it's a week of feeling very unwell and being in bed and not going to work, but for people who are older or very young, or who have other health conditions, it can be very serious indeed," she said.Pharmacy guild says cost pressures 'a factor'Pharmacy Guild SA vice-president Greg Scarlett said the number of people getting vaccinated against the flu at his Adelaide pharmacy had dropped by about 30 per cent over the past year.Flu season is spiking earlyPhoto shows close up of ladies hands administering a flu vaccination into persons arm with rolled up sleeveHealthcare workers have warned the flu season has arrived early this year and is hitting young kids harder than usual.He said there had been a "strong response" to vaccinations at the start of this year's flu season, but bookings had tapered off over the past month."We have noticed there hasn't been as much demand coming through the pharmacy as we would have expected and certainly as we experienced last year," he said."I think it's a significant reduction."Mr Scarlett said rising cost-of-living pressures made it hard for some people to afford flu vaccines, with a family-of-four charged up to $100 to get vaccinated."It's a significant expense for a family to commit to, to get everybody vaccinated," he said."Particularly for cost-of-living pressures these days, the cost of an influenza vaccination can be a factor."Vaccines are free for children aged under five, pregnant women, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, those aged over 65 and people with certain underlying chronic medical conditions.Western Australia made flu shots free for everyone during May and June, but other states, including South Australia, have not adopted similar incentives.Mr Scarlett said rising cost-of-living pressures were making flu jabs unaffordable for some. (ABC News: Stephanie Richards)SA Health Communicable Disease Control Branch nursing director Noel Lally said the cost of vaccines was not impacting people's willingness to get vaccinated."Whilst we're always looking at how the immunisation programs can be rolled out, we're confident that at the moment cost is not a barrier," he said.But Immunisation Coalition chairperson Dr Rod Pearce said making flu vaccines free would improve vaccination rates."We think the benefit of making it [the vaccine] available sends a message to the community that it's important," he said."We think it can change the message."Patients 'fed up' with vaccinesDr Pearce said "COVID fatigue" was also impacting vaccination rates, with people less proactive about getting vaccinated after the pandemic."The confusion between the significance of flu and the significance of COVID is highlighted particularly in children, where flu is quite a nasty disease in under-fives," he said."People, we think, are getting confused about that, and not focusing on their routine vaccines and the flu."Dr Goodson said her patients had also experienced "COVID fatigue"."I have noticed some of my patients saying they're a bit over it," she said."They've had their COVID vaccines, they've had other vaccines, they don't want anything more."They're kind of a bit fed up with vaccines and that's the sort of thing that we need to counter and explain why it's so important."Mr Lally said that flu jabs were being de-prioritised in the minds of some, and said SA Health was seeking to change that. (ABC News: Stephanie Richards)Mr Lally said people were not taking the flu as seriously as they did before the COVID-19 pandemic."Also, there are far more priorities and pressures on people these days in terms of their general life and perhaps the influenza vaccine isn't occupying that priority that it used to," he said."These are certainly things that we're looking at … and we'll use our learnings from this season to inform how we approach the season next year."Parents urged to vaccinate childrenChildren aged six months to five years are among the least likely in Australia to be vaccinated against the flu, despite being eligible for a free vaccination.Statistics show children are significantly under-represented among those who have been vaccinated. (Supplied)The latest data shows just 22 per cent of children in that age group are vaccinated nationally, compared to 61 per cent of those aged 65 and above.Just under 70 per cent of people admitted to hospital with confirmed influenza since April were aged under 16, with 5.9 per cent admitted directly to intensive care.Dr Goodson said it was important for parents to get their children vaccinated, as they are particularly vulnerable to the flu."COVID fatigue" has been blamed as one among several factors. (Pexels: Cottonbro)"Often younger children haven't been exposed to many viruses because of COVID and other reasons," she said."So, they're particularly vulnerable this year."Posted Wed 12 Jul 2023 at 9:27pmWednesday 12 Jul 2023 at 9:27pmWed 12 Jul 2023 at 9:27pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsPhoto shows Barron Trump and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in a split screen image. Four foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Photo shows Four people walk in the shallows of a coastline, with white backs slung over their shouldersRex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upLIVEPhoto shows A Regional Express (REX) aircraft unloads at Charleville Airport in south-west Queensland.Donald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorPhoto shows SuperannuationRelated storiesWell-loved year 9 girl dies weeks after catching influenzaTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A large brick building bearing an emblem and the name "St Joseph's Catholic College".RSV cases skyrocket across the country compared to same time last yearTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A young girl with red hair tucked into bed, lying on her side and blowing her nose.Flu vaccine that could last 'number of years' being trialled in BrisbaneTopic:InfluenzaPhoto shows A nurse with a tattooed arm injects a bearded man in a hospital clinicParents urged to vaccinate children after spike in influenza cases, hospital admissions Topic:Infant HealthPhoto shows A young child gets there nose blown. Are flu cases already 100 times higher than last year? Here's what we really know about the 2023 flu seasonTopic:AnalysisPhoto shows A woman blows a young child's nose.Australia is in another COVID wave, but it's not like the othersTopic:AnalysisPhoto shows Black a frame with sign saying fever clinic and a yellow arrow, sitting in front of a red wall with 'emergency' written on itRelated topicsAdelaideDiseases and DisordersInfluenzaNSWQLDSAVICVaccines and ImmunityWATop StoriesFamily of teacher's aide killed in preschool crash pay tribute to 'cherished mother, wife, daughter'Topic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Barron Trump and AOC expose the problems with the Democratic campaignTopic:US ElectionsFour foreign nationals found on remote NT island say they paid money to be taken to AustraliaTopic:Indigenous (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander)Rex given $80m lifeline, as ACCC warns Qantas controls 65pc of market and prices are upTopic:Stock MarketDonald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorJust InCosmic coincidence leads NASA scientists to believe Uranus could support lifeTopic:Planets and Asteroids18m ago18 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:50amLED lighting on surfboards may deter great white sharks from attacking surfersTopic:Shark Attacks30m ago30 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:38am'Today was the day': Almost eight years after Abby and Libby were murdered, a jury hands down a guilty verdictTopic:Homicide42m ago42 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 2:25amPlans to extend anti-protest laws in NSW labelled 'a rampage against free speech' by climate activistsTopic:Demonstrations7m ago7 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 3:01amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCBird flu: 'Alarming and unprecedented' Irish outbreak warning - BBC NewsBBC HomepageSkip to contentAccessibility HelpYour accountHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelMore menuMore menuSearch BBCHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelCultureFutureMusicTVWeatherSoundsClose menuBBC NewsMenuHomeIsrael-Gaza warWar in UkraineClimateVideoWorldAsiaUKBusinessTechMoreScienceEntertainment & ArtsHealthWorld News TVIn PicturesBBC VerifyNewsbeatWorldAfricaAustraliaEuropeLatin AmericaMiddle EastUS & Canada'Alarming and unprecedented' Irish bird flu warningImage source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Concerns have been raised as thousands of seabirds congregate to breed on Irish coastsAt a glanceA conservation group in the Republic of Ireland has warned of unprecedented outbreaks of bird fluMatt FoxBBC News NIPublished14 July 2023A conservation group in the Republic of Ireland has warned of "alarming and unprecedented outbreaks" of avian influenza.BirdWatch Ireland said the highly pathogenic H5N1 strain of the virus is devastating key Irish seabird colonies.The group manages the four most important tern colonies in Ireland.Hundreds of dead birds have been discovered in recent weeks with carcasses testing positive for bird flu.Image source, BirdWatch IrelandImage caption, BirdWatch fieldworkers have collected hundreds of dead birds in recent weeks In a recent statement, external the group said while it was early to assess the full impact, more than 160 adult common terns and 450 chicks were found dead at a breeding colony at Lady's Island Lake in County Wexford.It also said the disease was threatening sandwich terns and roseate terns nesting there. BirdWatch added it is concerned by the long-term consequences of an avian flu outbreak on Irish seabirds."A poor breeding season at a tern colony, with few chicks surviving, is unfortunate, but can be compensated for by better breeding success in subsequent years. "However, the deaths of large numbers of adult terns of breeding age has a much bigger impact, and recovery will take a long time."The Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine eased specific biosecurity measures to mitigate the spread of avian influenza on 1 June. The department has been contacted for an update on bird flu in the Republic of Ireland.Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, A number of black-headed gulls tested positive for the virus in Northern Ireland last monthBelfast's Window on Wildlife nature reserve was closed to the public last month after a number of gulls were found to have died from the virus.Further infections were detected in Comber, Coalisland, and Magherafelt.Northern Irelandâs chief vet, Dr Robert Huey, called on all bird and poultry keepers to immediately step up their biosecurity measures and remain vigilant against the latest threat of avian flu.He said the latest findings are a "stark warning to all of us" that avian influenza is a "constant and dynamic threat".A recent update from the Department of Agriculture, Enviornment and Rural Affairs (DAERA) said there is now an now an increasing likelihood of incursion into kept flocks."The findings at locations near Lough Neagh present the greatest concern, as they are in close proximity to high-density areas of commercial poultry premises."If members of the public find dead waterfowl or other wild birds, DAERA advises they should not touch the carcasses but take immediate action to report them to the department.DAERA has been contacted for an update on avian influenza in Northern Ireland.Health services in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland took part in an exercise in County Louth last month to enhance cross-border preparation for future incidents of bird flu.What is bird flu?Bird flu is an infectious disease of poultry and wild birds that has been around for a century. It usually flares up in autumn before fading away in spring and summerThe H5N1 virus, which is the most prevalent strain now, was first reported in China in 1996It can spread through entire flocks of domestic birds within a matter of daysLast year saw the biggest ever outbreak of bird flu in the UK and the worldDozens of different species of wild birds were hit, including golden eagles, buzzards, herring gulls and gannetsBird flu restrictions, which were imposed across most of the UK this year, were eased in April but experts have advised the H5N1 virus is still circulating, posing an ongoing risk to wild birdsIn the UK, a number of wild mammals have died, external after being infected with H5N1The World Health Organization (WHO) says H5N1 outbreaks have led to several hundred human cases, and many human deaths, since 1997The further spread of the H5N1 virus will have to be monitored closely to see whether it is mutating into a form which can spread amongst humansRelated topicsRepublic of IrelandScience & EnvironmentRSPBBiologyAnimalsEnvironmentBirdsMore on this storySuspected bird flu outbreak closes nature reservePublished3 June 2023Wild birds at risk even as avian flu measures endPublished18 April 2023Bird flu outbreak 'largest ever in these islands'Published9 December 2021Avian flu cases confirmed on nature reservesPublished12 July 2023Top storiesAssisted dying bill has strict safeguards, says MP proposing law changePublished3 hours agoGary Lineker to leave BBC's Match of the DayPublished4 hours agoWatch: 'Any good?' Lineker kicks off 25 years as MOTD hostPublished6 hours agoMore to exploreMatch of the Day: Who could replace Gary Lineker as host?The Papers: 'Pressure mounts on Welby' and Lineker to leave MOTDNew study on moons of Uranus raises chance of lifeColeen Rooney, GK Barry and Danny Jones in I'm a Celeb 2024 line-upCritics say Gladiator II is 'gobsmacking' and 'loopy'Woman, 102, recalls mother's betrayal in keeping WW2 sweetheart's letters from herHow to watch the Taurid Meteor Shower tonightEnergy smart meter issues creating north-south divideSquid Game director was so stressed on set he lost nine teethElsewhere on the BBCPaul Weller performs for Radio 2's Piano RoomA performance from a true mod legend, you may know him from bands such as The Jam or The Style CouncilAn award-winning topical satire showSatirical impressions from the team headed up by Jon Culshaw and Jan RavensLily and Miquita discuss the U.S. electionLifelong friends Lily Allen and Miquita Oliver discuss the world around them twice a weekCountryfile Rambles for BBC Children in NeedThe people, places and stories making news in the British countrysideMost read1Gary Lineker to leave BBC's Match of the Day2'Pressure mounts on Welby' and Lineker to leave MOTD3Mother-of-two dies during Turkey weight-loss op4National park says dropping Snowdon name a success5Zelensky says Russia has 50,000 troops in Kursk6'He'd be enraged': Al Fayed abuse survivors on their friendship7Coleen Rooney, GK Barry and Danny Jones in I'm a Celeb 2024 line-up8Saudi crown prince says Israel committing 'genocide' in Gaza9Bishop calls on Welby to resign over Church abuse scandal10NHS offers 'improved' stop smoking pillBBC News ServicesOn your mobileOn smart speakersGet news alertsContact BBC NewsHomeNewsSportEarthReelWorklifeTravelCultureFutureMusicTVWeatherSoundsTerms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpParental GuidanceContact the BBCGet Personalised NewslettersWhy you can trust the BBCAdvertise with usÂ© 2024 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.Father of three Mate Babic tragically dies from Influenza B leaving behind wife and three kids | Daily Mail Online Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Best Buys Discounts Black Friday My Profile Logout Login Breaking News Australia Video University Guide China Debate Meghan Markle Prince Harry King Charles III Weather Most read My Profile Logout Login Privacy Policy Feedback Tuesday, Nov 12th 2024 12PM 17°C 3PM 17°C 5-Day Forecast Advertisement Crypto and Tesla soar in 'Trump trades' frenzy: Digital currency hits record high and is tipped to hit $100,000 by inauguration Boost for the pound as fears of trade war hit euro: Sterling tops €1.21 for the first time since March 2022 Threat looms for UK trade: Britain has a lot to lose should Trump get his way on tariffs, warns ALEX BRUMMER Time capsule Ford Escort RS Cosworth sells for world record £202,500: Why this 32-year-old boy racer sold for so much Car makers slash new EV prices by up to a THIRD in desperate bid to meet binding end-of-year sales targets Top 10 uninsured driving hotspots revealed and Birmingham postcodes dominate the list Should employers split pension contributions 50/50 between couples to address gender inequality? STEVE WEBB replies Why now could be the right time to invest in gold: Here's what China, Putin and Trump mean for the precious metal MARKET REPORT: Australian gold miner Resolute Mining loses a third of value after chief exec and two employees are detained in Mali Crunch time in battle for Royal Mail: New regulations threaten to slam brakes on sale to 'Czech Sphinx' billionaire NatWest buys back another £1bn of its shares: Government's stake down by more than two-thirds since December last year Rich Ricci to scoop £16m in sale of London Stock Exchange rival Aquis Exchange Troubled Direct Line to axe 550 jobs as its boss embarks on a £100m cost-saving programme HMV to sell books from its flagship Oxford Street store as it looks to cash in on Christmas One third of homes on the market are chain-free as buyers seek a quick move ahead of April stamp duty hike Bitcoin hits new record above $84,000 after Trump win - as leading forecaster calls $100,000 achievable Thousands of cars could be recalled in new 'dieselgate' emissions scandal - we explain what you need to know My wealthy sisters make me feel mean at Christmas because they can lavish Mum with lots of presents - how do I tell them to stop? VICKY REYNAL replies How to avoid falling into the savings tax trap - and get the best cash Isa The ultimate doer-upper? Three farm plots going up for auction this month could make fantastic family homes Households batten down the hatches as higher mortgage costs: Homeowners save more fearing end of fixed deals Barclays, Nationwide and Santander cut some mortgage rates after base rate falls - but fixed deals are set to rise What President Trump means for your money - and a 10th birthday episode: This is Money podcast They should be an engine for growth but instead UK pension funds are an asset management blob: ALEX BRUMMER Previous Next EXCLUSIVE: Healthy and fit father-of-three, 37, dies from the flu just five days after falling ill with a slight cough: 'It's like we are living in the 18th century'Father of three dies from complications from the fluFamily left in financial ruins with no super or life insuranceMate Babic, 37, died five days after contracting Influenza B2023 anticipated to be the country's deadliest flu seasonBy BEN TALINTYRE FOR DAILY MAIL AUSTRALIA Published: 09:06 GMT, 14 July 2023 | Updated: 12:41 GMT, 14 July 2023 e-mail 480 shares 4 View comments A father of three has tragically died at just 37 after coming down with a fatal bout of the flu - as his wife issues a warning about this year's deadly strain.Mate Babic, from Canberra, unexpectedly passed away in the early hours of Wednesday morning after contracting influenza B, leaving behind his wife Carla and their three sons, Luka, 3, Sebastian, 6, and Marko, 7.Carla told Daily Mail Australia that her husband was a 'healthy man, a big personality and a six-foot-four mountain of a man'.'He was the loveable larrikin, full of jokes, the life of the party who would just make everyone smile,' Carla said.'It is crazy a six-foot-four, healthy man could pass away from Influenza B, it is like we are living in the 18th century, it is like the plague.' Mate Babic (right), 37, unexpectedly passed away in the early hours of Wednesday morning after contracting influenza B, leaving behind his wife Carla and their three sons, Luka, 3, Sebastian, 6, and Marko, 7 (pictured together) Carla (pictured) told Daily Mail Australia that her husband was a 'healthy man, a big personality and a six-foot-four mountain of a man who in a matter of days went from slightly ill to criticalCarla contracted Influenza B early last week and on Friday Mate had a slight cough but was still going about his day as normal, cooking dinner for the kids and settling in for a night in front of the footy.By Tuesday he was so sick he organised a TeleHealth appointment with his GP, who told him he would need to come in person to sort out a treatment and be properly assessed.On seeing her bedridden husband, Carla organised the appointment for the following day and Mate went to his parent's apartment to get some rest. He never came home.On Tuesday night the 37-year-old was struggling to sleep, running a high fever and suffering from sweats, shaking and bad bouts of coughing so he got up and ran himself a bath.He walked back into the bedroom and sat on the end of the bed, where he died.'It is just an absolute tragedy, I just don’t even know what to do. It doesn’t even seem real,' Carla said.'From Saturday morning where he was slightly unwell to Wednesday morning and he is gone.'His parents got woken up to their place flooded and their son dead.' The couple weren't vaccinated against the flu after Carla had a bad reaction to the Pfizer vaccine and said they were 'a bit apprehensive to have the flu vaccine'The couple weren't vaccinated against the flu after Carla had a bad reaction to the Pfizer Covid vaccine. She said they were 'a bit apprehensive to have the flu vaccine'.Carla had taken herself to get chest x-rays on Friday as well as blood tests after both she and Mate contracted Influenza A in December, with Carla's illness progressing into pneumonia and resulting in her having to be admitted to hospital.Mate also went to the hospital where he sat for hours on end in the emergency room before getting treatment and being sent home, an ordeal that Carla said made her husband swear he would never go back unless he was dying.'He went to the hospital when I was admitted but it was such a bad experience, it turned him off going again,' Carla said.'He had a long waiting period, sat in the emergency department for hours and hours on end and the whole experience turned him off going to the hospital to the stage where he told me, 'I am never going to hospital unless I am dying'.'Mate's passing leaves behind more than just devastation, with the family left in dire financial straits and their future home in Downer, ACT, still unfinished - a passion project the devoted father wanted to build for his family.'He has spent the last few years building our home and unfortunately, as a 37-year-old you wouldn’t think you couldn’t finish the project,' Carla said.'The landscaping is not done and we have no certificate of occupancy which means as it is I can't even sell it.'But I will have to find a way to get it and sell it as we cannot afford to stay here which is devastating.'My sons are like, 'Dad built this home' and I have to sell it, I have to look at selling his legacy, it is excruciating.' Mate's passing leaves behind more than just devastation, with the family left in dire financial straights and their home in Downer, ACT, still unfinished - a passion project the devoted father wanted to build for his family Mate also did not have any life insurance and next to no superannuation as he spent most of his career working for himself and didn’t pay himself super.'He didn’t have all these things that are, like, I will do it tomorrow, like life insurance and all that because you don’t expect you are going to die, and especially not from the flu,' Carla said.'He has left ... really big projects financially to try and work through and as a mother of boys, I can’t handle it as he also has left work undone at his parent's home which they are trying to sell.'It is truly just like we are living a nightmare.'A GoFundMe has been set up to try and help the family with the financial burden.Carla hopes by sharing her story others will be more vigilant and not end up in the same position as them.'I think it is really important to stress if you feel like you can’t breathe properly, don’t think tomorrow I am going to go or it will get better, just go to the hospital,' she said.'I had gone twice as I was paranoid but he was just like, 'it'll be alright I will be fine'.'But he didn’t get through it and it happened that quickly...'While she and her husband did not receive the flu vaccination, she says she will do so moving forward and urges everybody to treat the flu seriously.'Get vaccinated and go to the hospital if you are feeling unwell, get someone to check it out because this is a perfect example of you just don’t know what is going to happen - it is so unpredictable,' she said.'It can go from something pretty bad to totally catastrophic.'I know it is painful to sit and wait in a waiting room but it is better to be alive and because he wouldn’t go, my three-year-old will never remember his father and all my boys have lost the male role model in their life.' Carla says the family is in financial turmoil as Mate did not have any life insurance and next to no super as he spent most of his career working for himself and didn’t pay himself superAustralia is on track to eclipse its deadliest-ever flu season in 2019, with medical experts pointing the finger at poor vaccination rates in the post-Covid period.At least 107 Australians have lost their lives to influenza since the start of the year, according to data from the Federal Department of Health.However, the department warned the number did not reflect the true death toll as it would 'require the follow up of each specific case to determine the outcome of their infection'.Those aged 16 and under-represent 54 per cent of all emergency department admissions for influenza-like illness in recent weeks, with NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant labelling the spike 'concerning'.'In recent weeks we have seen influenza cases rising fastest among very young children as well as those aged five to 16 years, with these two age groups often accounting for around half of all flu cases diagnosed in NSW each week,' said Dr Chant.'Sadly, our children's hospitals are seeing an increasing number of these children being admitted for care and some of these patients are seriously unwell.Dr Chant urged people to get vaccinated against the flu to reduce the risk of them being hospitalised.Flu Share or comment on this article: Father of three Mate Babic tragically dies from Influenza B leaving behind wife and three kids e-mail 480 shares Most watched News videos Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach 91-year-old woman pushed down subway stairs by 'immigrant' robber Princess Kate observes Remembrance Sunday parade at Whitehall Jill Biden sits next to Kamala Harris at Arlington National Cemetery 2019: Tom Homan takes on AOC in heated exchange Narinder Kaur apologises for 'stupid' tweet about Kate Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach Moment Donald Trump snubs Ivanka for Elon in family portrait CCTV captures final moments before woman is mauled to death Joe Biden appears to wipe away tears at Arlington National Cemetery Shocking moment girl wearing headphones is hit and run over by train Moment King Charles lay a wreath and salutes on Remembrance Sunday Comments 4 Share what you think Newest Oldest Best rated Worst rated View all The comments below have been moderated in advance. View all The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline. We are no longer accepting comments on this article. Bing Site Web Enter search term: Search DON'T MISS Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the show Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump She's expecting I'm A Celeb's Coleen Rooney reveals vast list of instructions to look after her four children on two HUGE boards during her jungle stint EXCLUSIVECher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Britney Spears reunites with son Jayden, 18, after years of estrangement and move to Hawaii Reestablishing their bond Laundry legend or sock-shrinking disaster? Share this quiz with your loved ones so they can identify their bad household habits - and change them for good! Ad Feature Liam Payne's $9,500-a-month mansion he moved into with girlfriend Kate Cassidy weeks before his death is back on the rental market Kate's chic tweaks to refashion old looks: From velvet bows to hemlines and even a sari, how she makes recycled look fresh Maura Higgins enjoys final date night with new flame Pete Wicks before she heads to Australia for I'm A Celeb as a latecomer EXCLUSIVESuper soft hair in three easy steps: Simple routine provides up to 7x* more moisture for up to 72 hours** Ad Feature Iron Maiden star Paul Di'Anno's cause of death revealed after married father-of-six heavy metal singer passed away aged 66 EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Bizarre Alec Baldwin and wife Hilaria bring six of their children to the Spellbound premiere in New York City Family posed on the red carpet Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having a meal with family Find your inner glow: We asked one beauty writer to trial a new range of gentle skincare - here's how she got on Ad Feature EXCLUSIVEAerial photos show Leonardo DiCaprio's stunning eco-friendly compound is completed just in time for his 50th birthday Busta Rhymes praises 'superstar' Benny Hill as US rapper reveals he's a VERY unlikely fan of the saucy British comedian - after discovering him during childhood holidays in Morecambe Ralph Fiennes looks unrecognizable as he reunites with his The English Patient co-star Juliette Binoche for upcoming epic The Return I'm A Celebrity 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in first look snaps How understanding your glucose levels can help you feel less tired after meals Ad Feature Even the nepo babies are flocking to Australia! Celeb offspring join the exodus of Brits who prefer life Down Under EXCLUSIVETHE DUCHESS OF YORK: I'm on a mission to rid nappies of plastic - with my fifth grandchild on the way EXCLUSIVEPhil Foden's party-loving mother blasted by neighbours for 'deafening Disneyland two-hour fireworks display' Only Fools And Horses star Sir David Jason, 84, reveals he struggles to get parts because of his age Difficulties Looking to refresh your space before winter? Transform your home and interiors with these 10 top must-know brands Ad Feature Her Majesty The Queen: Behind Closed Doors review: Camilla's personality shone, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS Gary Lineker 'will QUIT Match of the Day at the end of the season' after 26 years presenting the show EXCLUSIVEMelvin Odoom is the SEVENTH star to land in Brisbane ahead of I'm A Celeb - as jungle-bound DJ shares first impression of Australian weather Nicolas Cage looks mysterious while dressed in character as he shoots upcoming Spider-Noir series on location in Los Angeles Damaged hair? Don't despair! With 1 billion bonds packed in every bottle, the NEW bond-building wonder product is here to help Ad Feature Coleen Nolan's son Jake Roche, 32, reveals he's going to be a dad in days as singer is forced to reschedule upcoming shows Chris Pratt and wife Katherine Schwarzenegger welcome their third child together and name has nod to JFK Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant slams current popular music as 'narcissistic and processed' as he throws shade at Oasis Coleen Rooney wears £1,060 silk pyjamas to jet out of UK airport for I'm A Celeb as she makes the most of luxury items Riviera glamour, Ibiza nightlife and the most stylish ships at sea: Why THIS is the ultimate cruise for your adults-only Mediterranean escape Ad Feature Aussie actress slams Rebel Wilson's 'absurd' claims she was sexually harassed by a producer on set of new film The Deb Popular British comedian and TV star shocks fans as he announces he's quitting Twitter for good Stepping back Kyle Richards 'terrified' to discuss 'evolving sexuality' with her kids amid Morgan Wade romance rumors Khloe Kardashian shows off her 27inch waistline in see-through nude lingerie as she announces new brand Trim physique Struggling to maintain your weight during menopause? You're not alone - here's why this happens and what you can do about it Ad Feature Inside Keith Urban's incredible $6.5m luxury car collection as his wife Nicole Kidman reveals the vehicle she likes to drive Austin Barnes and Matt Smith are surrounded by New York Mets fans on Caught Stealing set Channing Tatum enjoys a romantic stroll with co-star Kirsten Dunst on set of their upcoming film Roofman Benny Blanco sparks internet frenzy as he makes Sexiest Man Alive list amid Selena Gomez romance: 'He's redefining sexy!' BUSTED! The career-myths that are holding you back from success Advertising Megan Fox fans notice very specific astrological detail about her pregnancy announcement post with MGK EPHRAIM HARDCASTLE: Why did the late Queen miss out on a Nobel Peace Prize for transforming the Commonwealth? Bad Sisters star Sharon Horgan says she is glad the show made women feel like they weren't 'f***ing crazy' EXCLUSIVEMariah Carey's 5.5 inch custom sandals were designed to dazzle with over 10,000 hand-applied crystals EXCLUSIVEGive the gift of curiosity! Discover why the What on Earth! Magazine is the ultimate Christmas present for kids who love learning (and we have an offer) SHOPPING Nicole Scherzinger pictured wearing Kamala Harris shirt before 'coming out as a Trump supporter' Awkward MAFS UK's Polly Sellman and Adam Nightingale 'SPLIT' after explosive row as groom is branded a 'f*****g narcissist' Machine Gun Kelly's turbulent dating history laid bare as he prepares to welcome first child with Megan Fox Checkered past Bradley Cooper looks loved-up with Gigi Hadid in NYC after sparking shock with 'unrecognizable' face Smitten Who left the Big Brother house? Baked Potato is brutally sent home through the back door just days ahead of final Happy Monday's star Bez rocked out 'until 4am' after the MTV EMAs and 'showed Maya Jama how to party' Queen Camilla appears emotional as she speaks to domestic violence survivor in new documentary Powerful topic Keke Palmer claims costar made a racist remark to her on Ryan Murphy's Scream Queens series Allegations Coleen Rooney insists small food portions won't bother her on I'm A Celeb as she often 'misses a meal' and 'never gets hangry' Sting says Diddy allegations don't 'taint' Every Breath You Take - after disgraced rapper sampled song Nonplussed Kristin Chenoweth addresses Sean 'Diddy' Combs sex trafficking allegations with unusual response Rapper is under arrest The inventive way Megan Fox hid her baby bump at Halloween bash before pregnancy reveal with MGK Secret Yellowstone stars 'still processing' popular show's devastating ending - after bombshell season return Jane Moore shares the poignant reason she finally decided to say yes to I'm A Celebrity - and reveals her TWO big phobias The REAL reason Chris Martin kisses the tarmac before he flies after Coldplay frontman was seen planting his lips to the ground Leonardo DiCaprio rings in 50th birthday with Vittoria Ceretti, 26, at second star-studded dinner party Night out Loose Women icon 'set to reprise legendary role in Waterloo Road' as she returns to her soap roots Returning to the show Cast of iconic kids' TV show send fans wild with 'nostalgia overload' as they reunite 25 years after first episode Legendary Jeopardy! host Ken Jennings reveals major show update in off-camera admission He made an off-camera admission David Duchovny reveals 'failure of friendship' with The X-Files co-star Gillian Anderson amid tension on hit show Queen Camilla praised for 'moving' and 'powerful' ITV documentary on domestic abuse Positive response Legendary rocker hits back at John Farnham claim their former manager 'drugged me for years' Not happy EXCLUSIVEBrian Austin Green's surprising reaction to ex-wife Megan Fox's pregnancy with Machine Gun Kelly Unexpected Leggy Millie Mackintosh stuns in a black chic minidress as she joins husband Hugo Taylor at book launch As stylish as always Line Of Duty star Adrian Dunbar 'CONFIRMS' show's return: 'When they announce it, it's going to burn up the internet!' EXCLUSIVEWhat's really going with Euphoria? Cancelation rumors spark after Zendaya is cast in Christopher Nolan film Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly's ROLLERCOASTER romance timeline: From pregnancy to drinking each other's blood LL Cool J 'chased Monty Don to ask for a selfie as rapper reveals himself to be a VERY unlikely fan of the BBC horticulturist' GK Barry spills the beans on Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's awkward Instagram gaffe - as she prepares for I'm A Celeb Cat Deeley is criticised by viewers after unfortunate gaffe during Remembrance Day segment on This Morning I'm A Celebrity's Tulisa admits she 'doesn't want to draw attention' in jungle by recreating Myleene Klass' bikini moment EXCLUSIVEThe real reason Ben Affleck always looks 'miserable' The actor always manages to look downcast Emily Watson catches the eye in a graphic gown as she joins chic co-star Olivia Williams at VIP screening of DUNE: Prophecy Megan Fox and MGK fans react to pregnancy reveal eight months after pair ENDED engagement Delighted How England Lioness Chloe Kelly went from goofy teen to glamorous red carpet regular - and the £350 beauty treatment she swears by Travis Kelce and Taylor Swift joined by surprise sports superstar in Chiefs VIP suite as new images emerge EXCLUSIVEColeen Rooney to be greeted by her four sons on the I'm A Celebrity bridge after husband Wayne is forced to stay behind Jessica Simpson hints Eric Johnson marriage is OVER as she admits she 'put up' with things she 'did not deserve' Lizzie Cundy, 56, puts on a leggy display as she follows in Jennifer Lopez's footsteps and undergoes a HydraFacial EXCLUSIVEBBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he change Tube's 5G advertising Luann de Lesseps, 59, reveals which A-List actor she made out with and how she is a member of the Mile High Club I'm A Celeb star Oti Mabuse reveals she is taking part on the gruelling ITV show to 'catch up on sleep' after giving birth to her first child last year Timothee Chalamet reveals the feature he was told would prevent him from succeeding in Hollywood Huge star The View panel fiercely defend Nicole Scherzinger over Russell Brand's election hat Speaking out Queen Silvia of Sweden stuns in deep purple ensemble as she joins King Carl XVI Gustaf for award ceremony in Stockholm Coleen Rooney gives a subtle nod to her Wagatha Christie trial against Rebekah Vardy as she prepares for I'm A Celebrity Strictly sends viewers wild as it reveals comedian ie FIRST confirmed for festive special as he jokes he's about to 'ruin Christmas' EXCLUSIVEColeen's one last night with Wayne! Rooney insisted on taking the last possible flight to Australia ahead of her I'm A Celeb stint Travis Kelce's ex Kayla Nicole makes wild accusation against Taylor Swift Nicole dated Kelce on and off for five years before his romance with Swift James McAvoy is seen for the first time on the Glasgow set of his new film California Schemin' about hoax rappers Silibil N' Brains EXCLUSIVEMadonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris It looks like Madonna is no longer crazy for her recent toyboy Demi Moore, 62, shows off her bikini body as she wishes 2lb dog Pilaf a happy birthday Kevin Costner breaks silence on Yellowstone's John Dutton being killed off in Season 5 part two premiere Cash-strapped Diddy is renting out his private jet for $432k-a-flight as sex trial looms Troubled rapper is trying to generate cash Benny Blanco dishes on VERY romantic mornings with Selena Gomez as he makes People's Sexiest Man Alive issue Katy Perry brutally trolled after sharing her pick for the year's best film Got more than she bargained for Prince Harry pens heartfelt message of 'admiration and appreciation' for his 'fellow veterans' on Remembrance Day Charles grins as he welcomes King of Bahrain to Windsor Castle with a warm hug Charles is hosting Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa As Philip Schofield lays his 'extraordinary loyal' mother Pat to rest, friends tell how she became his rock after his TV downfall, reveals KATIE HIND BBC drops first trailer for Return to Paradise and finally confirms release date for Death in Paradise spin-off series Coming soon The Wheel fans blast mortified Helen Flanagan for getting 'very simple' question wrong - but do you know the answer? Dexys Midnight Runners original member dead: Andy Leek passes away aged 66 following long battle with Parkinson's disease just days after tying the knot Shirtless Romeo Beckham shows off his ripped physique as he enjoys getaway with pals - after confirming romance with Gray Sorrenti Cher: The night I took a drunken John Lennon to the Playboy mansion - and he stripped stark naked in front of me in the infamous secret Grotto Barry McGuigan is the SIXTH star to touch down in Australia ahead of his I'm A Celeb stint and jokes he's 'there to sign his next big fighter' Ex Big Brother star Narinder Kaur faces furious backlash for saying Kate Middleton has 'aged so much' as princess returns to royal duties Gary Barlow is dwarfed by best friend musician Eliot Kennedy as the pair share a boozy bath on the Take That star's wine tour series Eamonn Holmes takes shocking swipe at GB News co-star's appearance as sexism debate takes personal turn - and she warns 'back off!' Laverne Cox breaks silence on whether she'll leave US after Trump's election win Opened up about the possibility of leaving Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker transform into Morticia and Gomez Addams for new Halloween posts Getting into character Damian Lewis is criticised for his conduct during Wolf Hall interview after he confessed the role has 'worn him down' Mission Impossible 8 FIRST LOOK: Tom Cruise's Ethan Hunt dangles from a glider in trailer as title for long-delayed conclusion is finally revealed Cruz Beckham, 19, and girlfriend Jackie Apostel, 29, enjoy another public display of affection as they share a passionate kiss Netflix fans rave over 'gripping' crime thriller based on true story 'full of twists and turns' - praising 'excellent acting and an unpredictable ending' Gladiator II review: This sequel falls short of its masterpiece predecessor but is still heaps of farfetched and ferocious fun Deal Or No Deal fans blast ITV bosses for 'killing' the show with big change to Stephen Mulhern's reboot Not happy Chappell Roan has shock four word response to report about her split from management Speaking out EXCLUSIVEPregnant Charlotte Dawson details how she's learning to forgive fiancé Matthew Sarsfield's sexting scandal as she insists that it would have been 'easier to walk away' Kristin Cavallari's ex Mark Estes 'proposes' to Love Island star after hanging out with former girlfriend Marriage plans Chris Evans continues to wow with bookish new look as he promotes Red One in NYC Looking good Yellowstone fans confused after Kevin Costner appears in credits for season five part two despite departure Melissa Suffield jiggles around in a pink bikini as she hits back at cruel trolls and urges to acknowledge the 'reality of everyday bodies' Kyle Richards gives BFF Teddi Mellencamp divorce advice amid Edwin Arroyave split At different stages in their divorces Paul Mescal reveals his 'heartbeat is going through the f***ing roof' as he arrives at the Gladiator II premiere in his hometown Dublin with his family Jennifer Meyer, 47, flashes her $500K diamond engagement ring from billionaire Geoffrey Ogunlesi, 33 Pricey Moment Laurence Fox rescued his fiancee's dog Rocky after pet Jack Russell got trapped in hole underground EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celebrity contestants are set to be battered by freak storms and torrential rain as bad weather threatens to 'ruin' the series Katie Price appears to reignite bitter feud with Emily Atack as she makes snide 'fishy' dig AGAIN in front of huge audience at The Clapham Grand The Day Of The Jackal star Ursula Corbero star sends fans wild with her racy social media snaps after revealing she was 'confused' by her 'weak' role Livid Loose Women fans urge James Martin to 'move with the times' after 'daft, money-wasting' cooking confession on ITV show Moment country star SCREAMS as she falls and takes out her guitarist mid-show Performing in Helotes, Texas on Friday Diana Vickers sets pulses racing in a skimpy gold bikini as she soaks up the sun on lavish Ibiza getaway Sofia Richie is 17 years YOUNGER than sister Nicole Richie but they look the same age in rare photo Raye and LL Cool J look all partied out as they leave Manchester after MTV EMAs - where the British singer was named Best UK & Ireland artist Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright enjoy Majorca getaway with Olly Murs after admitting they're in the 'boring phase of their relationship' Taylor Swift fans furious over savage Jeopardy! clue about Travis Kelce On the program's official Instagram account Iskra Lawrence is praised for sharing footage of her homebirth after welcoming baby daughter 'P. P' Wolf Hall leaves viewers 'traumatised' with 'brutal' execution scene just minutes into BBC premiere as they beg 'please don't show that again!' Rebekah Vardy sets tongues wagging as she packs for mystery trip abroad and posts a teasing emoji - as nemesis WAG Coleen Rooney jets off to Australia for I'm A Celeb Antiques Roadshow guest gasps 'I could cry!' as he learns staggering value of sculpture he bought for just £50 and was using as a DOORSTOP How Alison Hammond's turbulent love life influenced her debut novel, from cheating scandals to surprise encounters at a massage parlour Coleen Rooney jets to Australia ahead of I'm A Celeb stint and reveals nod to her family - as she prepares to join the five celebs who have already landed Brooklyn Beckham reveals his tattoo tribute to Quincy Jones and says he 'misses him more than he can imagine' after the legendary producer's death aged 91 Has Leonardo DiCaprio finally found love with Vittoria Ceretti and ditched his golden rule? A look at the star's relationships as he turns 50 The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Idina Menzel and Taye Diggs' son, 15, is nearly as tall as his mother as mother-son duo attend Wicked premiere Legendary Chicago singer-songwriter Ella Jenkins dead at 100 Mariah Carey will be 'quizzed under oath' over claims estranged brother sold drugs despite star still reeling from losing mom and sister on the same day Quincy Jones is laid to rest at private family funeral in Los Angeles a week after his death at age 91 Netflix fans furious as three whole episodes of blockbuster series are uploaded with no sound in 'crippling' blunder - raging 'I thought I was going mad!' Linda Lusardi gets £3.8k non-surgical face lift and says she feels '10 years younger' - after becoming 'depressed about her jowls' James Norton reveals he has put off having children 'because it wouldn't be fair to have them right now' as he details split from fiancée Imogen Poots Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson finally addresses on set behavior controversy including 'peeing in bottles' Charli XCX leads the nominees at the Rolling Stone UK Awards with three nods as Raye and Dua Lipa are also honoured Movie director Cameron Crowe, 67, welcomes his 3rd child with publicist Anais Smith, 40 Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death tells how singer took cocaine with him Robbie Williams announces three huge UK stadium shows as part of mammoth Live 25 tour Damian Lewis slams Donald Trump by comparing him to his Wolf Hall alter-ego Henry VIII as he claims he's become 'disillusioned to the people around him' Tulisa unveils club-themed home makeover complete with huge dressing room, home gym, a bridge that leads to nowhere Gayle King fans warn her to be 'careful' after CBS host admits 'stepping out' of her comfort zone with Shaboozey Yellowstone star Cole Hauser says it would be a 'shame to stop' telling the Dutton family story Ellie Goulding shares a rare snap of son Arthur, 4, and kisses him on the cheek as they adorably dress in matching Spider-Man costumes Sunday Brunch viewers bombard show with complaints just minutes into episode - sinking claws into 'boring and unfunny' Channel 4 scenes Ben Affleck is only 'one errant remark' away from being cancelled and believes the 'phone could stop ringing' despite his success Eddie Redmayne and Úrsula Corberó put on a steamy display as husband and wife in scenes from Sky TV's The Day Of The Jackal Jamie Oliver enjoys Coldplay concert with a female friend in Sydney - after he pulled his children's book from the shelves Mike Tyson has ditched veganism, is on a sex and cannabis ban and training six hours a day to prepare to fight 27-year-old Jake Paul Your turn next? Fans go wild for adorable photo of 'auntie' Taylor Swift posing with fellow Chiefs WAG's baby 'I thought to myself, what if it had been my daughter?' Queen Camilla praises mother of woman killed by her ex - and admits she wouldn't be as 'dignified' in the same position Friends fans complain of 'plot hole' in well-known episode which still 'drives them wild' 26 years later Strictly's Nancy Xu says she is 'gutted' that she and Shayne Ward will miss out on Blackpool and that she finds it 'unfair' that he was 'criticised' Geri Horner pulls series of animated facial expressions as she wraps up warm in stylish white outfit for autumn walk Ant McPartlin looks exhausted as he works up a sweat during gruelling workout ahead of I'm A Celebrity Ali Larter, 48, came to fame for her whipped cream bikini in Varsity Blues - see her now The truth behind Ben Shephard's This Morning absence revealed as ITV star fronts new project worlds away from daytime hit James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness Lauren Pope kicks off festive season a little too early putting up her Christmas tree as she reveals she had anxiety about last year due to being a single mother Advertisement Follow DailyMail Subscribe Daily Mail Follow @dailymail Follow DailyMail Follow MailOnline Follow Daily Mail MORE DON'T MISS Radio 1 DJ Dean McCullough is the FOURTH star to arrive in Australia ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! How Sophie has become Kate's closest ally: 'Maternal' Duchess is a huge support to Princess of Wales - and it's come about because of void left by Meghan Furious Autumnwatch fans rage 'it's appalling and an insult to viewers!' as they skewer BBC for 'dumbing down' beloved nature show with complete overhaul Coleen Rooney reveals the secret to making her marriage with Wayne work as she confesses there were times she thought they wouldn't make it Emily Atack claims her party trick is 'worse than a one night stand' as she recalls the 'embarrassing' and 'horrendous' drunken night out Liam Payne larks about with close pal Rita Ora in unearthed video of them as the heartbroken singer pays tribute at the MTV EMAs Lorde shares a photo of a table littered with drugs and alcohol after celebrating her birthday Partied hard after celebrating with friends Keely Hodgkinson sparks concern as she displays her very sunburnt chest while posing in a tiny crop top during lavish holiday in Hawaii Tulisa reveals she'll QUIT showbusiness in the next two years despite wanting to relaunch solo career after I'm A Celebrity stint Major EastEnders 'Christmas spoiler REVEALED as actress accidentally leaves top secret script on train' Nightmare MTV VMAs worst dressed: Flamboyant outfits that fell flat as A-listers swarmed the red carpet in Manchester Olivia Rodrigo announced as fourth headliner for BST Hyde Park - as her support act is confirmed Kate's meaningful messages: How Princess of Wales used her outfits to pay tribute to Diana, the late Queen and her great-grandmother during Remembrance events BBC Breakfast in ANOTHER hosting shake-up as Jon Kay disappears from show without explanation The Penguin fans hail season one ending as 'the best thing DC has made' as Colin Farrell gives six-word response to calls for a second series Dancing On Ice's Vanessa Bauer says the show's new 24-hour bullying hotline is 'very necessary' ahead of its return in 2025 Viewers defend Boots' 'fabulous' Christmas advert starring Bridgerton's Adjoa Andoh after 'snowflake' critics blasted 'woke' plot Leomie Anderson ditches her gown for a VERY skimpy nude co-ord as she joins Love Island's Indiyah Polack and Maya Jama at MTV EMAs after party Shirtless Mark Wahlberg, 53, orders a trolley full of ice on room service as he continues his wacky health regime Sophie's been supportive from the start! Duchess helped an 11-year-old Princess Beatrice as she fainted on the balcony on Remembrance Sunday Listen as Katie Price performs her 2017 song I Got U at The Clapham Grand - so do you think her vocals make the cut? Strictly fans are left FUMING as they accuse Shirley Ballas of being 'biased' for sending home Shayne Ward in nail biting dance off Rita Ora breaks down in tears as she pays moving tribute to close friend Liam Payne at the MTV EMAs Emotional moment Kristina Rihanoff poses for incontinence pad campaign after she and husband Ben Cohen put their £1.75m home up for sale amid financial woes James Argent shares passionate kiss with new girlfriend Nicoline Artursson as besotted couple pack on the PDA for romantic Bonfire Night date Victoria Beckham displays incredibly toned figure as she poses for a mirror selfie - after husband David gave her new beauty product rave reviews Ice Spice flashes her abs in a cropped varsity top and low-rise pleated skirt as she steps out for dinner in Paris after performing her Y2K! World Tour Rita Ora leads the red carpet glamour in a pink feathered gown as she joins glamorous Maya Jama, Vick Hope and Raye at the MTV EMAs Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after her Australian visa was torn up - but there's a glaring problem with her new X-rated plan EXCLUSIVEKate Middleton's Remembrance Day pain: Emotional Princess of Wales appeared 'sad but regal' at Cenotaph, says body language expert Paddy McGuinness reveals he got 'choked up' over the huge support he's had for his 300 mile charity cycle challenge after feeling 'down and dejected' Rita Ora flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in ELEVEN incredible looks as she makes history as host of the MTV EMAs Raye leaves fans speechless with her vocals as she takes to the stage alongside Tyla and Shawn Mendes at the MTV EMAs Charli XCX is snubbed at MTV EMAs despite five nominations while Chappell Roan also leaves empty handed Ben Affleck looks miserable as 'spectacular' Jennifer Lopez shows him what he's missing on red carpet Sabrina Carpenter fan urinates all over the concert floor in San Francisco Ben Affleck treats his son Samuel, 12, to courtside seats at star-studded Lakers vs. Raptors game in LA Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo offer apologies for crying so much during Wicked promotion Kate wears Diana's ring in public for the first time since Christmas: Sapphire engagement ring is back after Princess opted to wear eternity bands during treatment Art Garfunkel recalls recent tearful reunion with Paul Simon after 'not seeing each other' for many years Margot Robbie shows off her midriff in a crop top less than a month after giving birth as she steps out in LA SPOILER ALERT: The real reason Yellowstone bosses sealed Kevin Costner's fate in first 30 seconds of bombshell season return Wolf Hall: The Mirror And The Light review: Cromwell's so menacing his glare could split a skull, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS MTV EMAs WINNERS FULL LIST: Taylor Swift dominates with FOUR gongs including Best Artist... while Raye and Tyla also win The White Lotus season 3 teaser shows first look at Blackpink's Lisa as hospitality host Keith Urban scrapes $600K Rolls Royce after dropping nepo baby Sunday Rose off at Billie Eilish concert Gavin Rossdale looks loved up with his Gwen Stefani lookalike girlfriend Xhoana X at MTV EMAs Happy Monday's star Bez causes CHAOS as he REFUSES to let go of the mic from Rita Ora in hilarious moment at MTV EMAs Nicola Peltz Beckham says her 'heart is shattered' in emotional tribute to Quincy Jones as she promises to look after his daughter Camila Mendes debuts bold new look as she gears up to film live-action remake of Masters Of The Universe Emmerdale's James Moore reveals future family plans after marrying partner Sophie Edwards as bride recalls their first date N-Dubz singer Tulisa Contostavlos is the third star to arrive in Brisbane ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! Coleen Rooney will NOT be reunited with Wayne after her I'm A Celeb ordeal' as football fixtures leave him grounded EXCLUSIVEColdplay frontman Chris Martin's bizarre act before boarding a plane out of Australia bound for New Zealand Who left Strictly Come Dancing? Shayne Ward's dancing journey is over after receiving the lowest results and landing in the dance-off against Wynne Evans Strictly Come Dancing RECAP as Shayne Ward is eliminated in week eight after losing dance off to Wynne Evans Nicole Kidman looks elegant in a black coat and dress as she heads out in New York City s EXCLUSIVEViewers insist star of Lidl's Christmas advert is the 'double' of Princess Charlotte - so, who is the royal lookalike? Felicity Jones cuts a chic figure in a black blazer and jeans as she addresses the audience at a screening for her new film The Brutalist Shawn Mendes dons smart suit at MTV EMAs in first red carpet appearance since addressing sexuality Zoe Saldana and Kerry Washington glow in silky tops as they lead the stars at ACLU Bill of Rights Awards Christina Ricci oozes business chic in blazer dress at book signing in LA for her new tarot deck and guidebook Fans inundate Bruce Willis's wife with messages of support after she shares 'heartbreaking' video Right behind her Pregnant Gisele Bundchen puts on a leggy display in tiny shorts as she leaves her old house in Miami Beach with a large box Bradley Cooper's unrecognizable face in snap with Gigi Hadid sparks social media confusion: 'Is that AI Bradley?' SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone femme fatale Sarah Atwood's involvement in John Dutton's brutal death is revealed in Season 5 Part 2 premiere Joker 2 star says it is the 'worst film ever made' and that he and his co-stars knew it was 'going to bomb' while filming Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright show off VERY lavish Christmas lights and decorations at £3.5m Essex mansion Georgia Toffolo stuns in a sheer gown as she celebrates 30th birthday and proposal from James Watt with personalised beer Kim Kardashian embraces on-screen mother Glenn Close as they film Ryan Murpjy's new Hulu series All's Fair Ariana Grande fans point out NSFW error on Mattel's Wicked doll packaging - as collection risks mass recall Surfing royals: How Princess Diana sparked her sons' love for the ocean after Prince Harry recently rode waves in California and Prince William surfed chilly Scottish waters Rihanna looks totally at ease as she sits in front of her own Fenty Beauty ad at a bus stop in humorous post Halsey and fiancé Avan Jogia look loved-up at Lakers vs. Raptors NBA game in LA Prince Edward remembers 'all who have made the ultimate sacrifice' as he lays Remembrance Sunday wreath Big Brother viewers SLAM show's 'totally unfair' final twist just days ahead of grand finale: 'Sack whoever came up with this idea!' ROBERT HARDMAN: Courage of the Princess of Wales on parade - in a sign of what matters MOST to the royals Big target Khloe Kardashian throws niece Dream a soccer-themed 8th birthday bash No expense spared Jedward put on a VERY animated display in matching sequinned suits as they lark about on the red carpet at the MTV EMAs Rita Ora's proud mum Vera, 60, wears a chic black suit as she supports her daughter on the MTV EMAs red carpet Halsey and new fiancé Avan Jogia look loved up while enjoying a romantic lunch in NYC Yellowstone's surprising connection to Australia... and it's not actress Jacki Weaver Amelia Gray Hamlin puts on an edgy Y2K display in low-waisted jeans and busty tank top in Milan Elon Musk slams Dana Carvey's impression of him on post-election SNL and says show's been 'dying for years' Air Bud's Kevin DiCicco says he's homeless and dealing with major health problems James Bond fans have revealed the very unlikely Aussie who should play the next 007 Interesting choice Tulisa Contostavlos 'set to use I'm A Celebrity as launchpad for new solo career' as N-Dubz singer becomes third star to arrive EXCLUSIVEShe's the seductive 60s TV actress who was called the 'feline devil' by an iconic vigilante superhero - can you guess who? Bella Hadid flashes her incredible abs in tiny bikinis in racy photo dump from her recent trip to Dubai Looking good Adam Brody and Kristen Bell show off undeniable chemistry as they support Netflix's Nobody Wants This in LA Sam Thompson says he 'might get another bridge reunion' with Pete Wicks if he gets the axe from Strictly Come Dancing Kim Kardashian sports edgy black trench coat as she visits skin care clinic in Beverly Hills Jodie Turner-Smith sets pulses racing as she swaps her regal red carpet gown for skintight black PVC dress at the MTV EMAs Jada Pinkett Smith sparks health concern following rare date night with husband Will Smith The future's orange! Lorraine Kelly takes her adorable granddaughter to her first Dundee United game Proud granny Make breakfast TV great again! Eammon Holmes looks unrecognisable as he transforms into perma-tanned Donald Trump What Kate said to Sophie: Lip reader reveals conversation between Princess of Wales and Duchess of Edinburgh at Cenotaph Katherine Ryan, 41, puts on a busty display as she makes rare red carpet appearance with daughter Violet, 15, at the MTV EMAs Maya Jama channels Elizabeth Hurley as she slips into THAT career-making Versace safety pin gown to attend the MTV European Music Awards Lioness Chloe Kelly looks incredible in a cropped bandeau top and thigh-high boots on the red carpet at MTV EMAS What Taylor Swift told security guard: Pop star's cutting remark to her entourage during wild arrival to watch Travis Kelce Rita Ora shares a red carpet kiss with husband Taika Waititi ahead of her history-making THIRD hosting gig at the MTV EMAs Mariah Carey and son Moroccan dress up as Alvin and the Chipmunks for Halloween in rare family snap Venom 3 stays strong at the box office for third week in a row but new holiday film emerges to challenge it Gemma Atkinson turns heads in a busty leather dress as she poses on the MTV European Music Awards red carpet Travis Kelce sends girlfriend Taylor Swift wild as breaks Kansas City Chiefs history with another touchdown Jodie Turner-Smith puts on a show-stopping display in royal blue gown with a train and fascinator at the 2024 MTV EMAs SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone fans furious over fate of Kevin Costner's John Dutton in Season 5 part two premiere Jeremy Clarkson WILL join protesting farmers at rally in Westminster this week after fears of 'police ban' Pregnant Charlotte Crosby shows off her baby bump alongside fiancé Jake Ankers at MTV EMAs in Manchester Mabel, 28, rocks a quirky checked dress as she joins her chic mum Neneh Cherry, 60, at the MTV European Music Awards Brooklyn Beckham goes for a spin in his classic Mustang in Los Angeles after adding another car to his impressive collection Emily Ratajkowski flashes leg in glam red coat as she walks her dog in New York City She looked super chic as she stepped out Vick Hope puts on a VERY leggy display in a racy thigh-high split skirt and sculpted bodice at the star-studded MTV EMAs James Norton admits split from ex-fiancée Imogen Poots was not his decision as he reveals heartbreaking reason they broke up Katie McGlynn puts on a VERY leggy display in a skimpy silver mini dress as she joins busty Liberty Poole at the MTV EMAs Aaron Taylor-Johnson cuts a debonair figure in a burgundy suit as he graces the red carpet at 2024 MTV EMAs Holly Hagan puts on a VERY busty display in a plunging gown as she cosies up to pregnant co-star Charlotte Crosby at MTV EMAs Tony Hinchcliffe breaks his silence on Trump election win after calling Puerto Rico a 'floating island of garbage' How to watch Yellowstone Season 5 Part 2 premiere in Australia as show begins new frontier without Kevin Costner . Brianna Chickenfry reveals why she won't get Zach Bryan lyric tattoo removed amid ugly split Interview Britney Spears claims was censored in 2016 is finally published Discussing her conservatorship EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb welcomes its first arrival! McFly star Danny Jones touches down at Brisbane Airport Taylor Swift's entourage get into heated altercation as she arrives to watch Travis Kelce and Chiefs Drama Leomie Anderson flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in a VERY skimpy tasselled gown as she poses up a storm on the MTV EMAs red carpet Netflix fans gripped by 'best show they've ever watched' - raving that crime thriller 'had them hooked just a few minutes in' EXCLUSIVEKelly Brook and her husband Jeremy Parisi land major ITV show deal after winning over viewers on BBC's Race Across the World Mel B shares a glimpse of her VERY organised shoe collection - after branding fellow Spice Girls 'd***heads' Raye puts on a very animated display as she stuns in a quirky bejewelled gown ahead of her performance at the MTV EMA's Pamela Anderson's secrets to embracing her natural beauty at 57: From sunrise walks to her no makeup rule and the one thing she avoids 'at all costs' Georgia Kousoulou shows off her bump in skintight dress as she celebrates her daughter's birth with 'dream baby shower' Gigi Hadid and Bradley Cooper enjoy date night as they watch Alyssa Milano performing on Broadway Molly Marsh dazzles as she shows off her enviable figure in sparkly burgundy dress at the MTV European Music Awards Katie Price jumps on stage during London drag competition and belts out her 2017 track I Got U - as she reignites celebrity feud Coleen Rooney suffers major blow ahead of I'm A Celebrity appearance as the first stars touch down in Australia EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb's Sam Thompson reveals he made emotional phone call to best pal Pete Wicks during thunderstorm-hit flight to Australia Chappell Roan 'parts ways' with her management team amid skyrocketing career Split Susan Sarandon admits she'll never work in Hollywood again and reflects on being dropped by her agent after Palestine remarks Pregnant Lottie Tomlinson cradles her bump in a stunning white dress as she celebrates her baby shower with twin sisters Phoebe and Daisy Noel Gallagher is 'working on a new album' with 'six tracks already in the bag' - but brother Liam is yet to contribute I was on The Undateables - the amount we actually got paid and how long it took to film a single date left me completely stunned . The Duchess of Edinburgh, 59, stepped into 'maternal' role at Cenotaph to help 'stoic' Kate Middleton - offering a supportive touch, says body language expert Leonardo DiCaprio ditches the models to party with his peers as he celebrates 50th birthday with Brad Pitt, 60, Paris Hilton, 43, Katy Perry, 40 and his long-time buddies Emmerdale's James Moore ties the knot with partner Sophie Edwards in emotional lakeside ceremony as bride reveals the soap star's heartfelt speech Kaia Gerber oozes glamour in Marc Jacobs gowns and opens up about her intellect being underestimated as she graces Vogue's December cover VERY dramatic exits! From Olivia Rodrigo disappearing through a hole to Gemma Collins' viral mishap - on-stage tumbles that will make you wince English acting legend is approached to be face of Marks & Spencer as bosses keen to sign 'chic, high calibre and sophisticated' star to evolve brand GMA host looks just like his famous father as he shares romantic proposal photos Will Reeve has made a made a big step in his life EXCLUSIVEZara McDermott will NOT be joining boyfriend Sam Thompson in Australia as he films I'm A Celebrity spin-off show Today's headlines Most Read Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC... Putin was so close to launching a nuke in Ukraine that Britain was preparing for the fallout... as... One of the founders of world's oldest Breastfeeding support charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of... The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS... Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more... The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make... Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said... How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving... RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be... Teenagers in Jewish youth football team 'attacked by knife-wielding pro-Palestine mob in Berlin' as violence... Two mothers who 'refused to quarantine' in hotels after claiming they flew to Dubai and got boob jobs could... The Skegness property gold rush: It's rated the world's worst holiday resort, but 'Skeggy' is now creating a... Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having... Strongman filmed lifting a Ford Transit van and pulled tractor with his bare hands while claiming car crash... Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new... Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales World's oldest joke shop which supplied fake moustaches, magic wands and whoopee cushions to generations of... Middle class misery SPREADS! After pan-demonium over Le Creuset sale, now Britain is running out of... Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty.... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change -... BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his... More than 16,000 people object to 'outrageous' plans for Norfolk 'mega-farm' housing 870,000 chickens and... Busta Rhymes praises 'superstar' Benny Hill as US rapper reveals himself as a VERY unlikely fan of the saucy... Even the nepo babies are flocking to Australia! Celeb offspring join the exodus of Brits who prefer life... Parents' fury after school tries to 'ban' Christmas references from its festive pantomime so it can be... Phil Foden's party-loving mother blasted by neighbours for 'deafening Disneyland two-hour fireworks display'... Why Cadbury's Chocolate Fingers are changing hands in France for more than TWENTY times their retail price Christmas pudding is no longer important for the festive dinner table, poll reveals Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump Scientist reverses her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of... Madonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris Woman in her 30s killed in Manchester house fire: Probe launched into inferno that 'young children were... Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant slams current popular music as 'narcissistic and processed' as he throws... I'm A Celebrity's 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in... Bishop of Newcastle joins chorus of voices calling for Archbishop Justin Welby to quit after 'ignoring'... I'm a survivor of child abuser John Smyth... Archbishop Justin Welby put his reputation above victims and... I went to the Le Creuset sale and it was HELL, it was absolute chaos and organisers completely... Rachel Reeves' National Insurance hike could force most nurseries to raise fees for parents, shocking survey... Families on former council estate facing £66,000 bill so Labour can hit net zero heating targets brand... Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending bizarre letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he... EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Fury in Sweden at video of Syrian asylum seeker pushing a 91-year-old widow down stairs before violently... The lead up to Gary Lineker 'quitting Match of the Day' follows a long history of Twitter own goals and... Ryanair flight forced to make emergency landing at Stansted Airport after passenger dies onboard How Narinder Kaur went from Big Brother fame to outspoken TV panellist: From slating the royals to legal row... More than 3,000 privately-educated pupils applied to join state schools between June and September as... MORE HEADLINES Kate Middleton supporters slam TV presenter for 'disgusting' remark about Princess of Wales' appearance as she returns to royal duties after cancer treatment Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time and shares unseen photo: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death discloses new details about singer's last days and insists he did nothing wrong Fury in Sweden at video of Syrian asylum seeker pushing a 91-year-old widow down stairs before violently mugging her as she visits husband's grave The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Family of pharmacy student, 21, who killed herself after being wrongly told she had failed an exam hit out at university after 'totally unnecessary tragedy' Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' PAN-demonium! Le Creuset sale sparks four-hour queue and police operation as hundreds of shoppers descend on warehouse to bag high-end luxury pot at cut price 'I have no regrets': Defiant council worker who was sacked for 'AdultHumanMale' instead of he/him tells how he's been forced to use his retirement savings to pay legal bill More than 3,000 privately-educated pupils applied to join state schools between June and September as Labour's VAT tax raid forces parents to pay extra £2,000 on fees Jill Biden gives Kamala Harris the cold shoulder after husband Joe was forced out of race the VP lost to Trump Mother is torn apart by pack of wild dogs on her walk to work after making desperate last phone call begging for help Moment 'six-foot black cat stalks through UK field hunting prey' as locals reveal fears a 'panther' is on the loose BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Christine after their break-up Artisan potter wins bitter £300k four-year battle with painter neighbour over ownership of 4ft-wide stream dividing their gardens Trump border czar Tom Homan has a blunt message for his critics as he defends his mass deportation plan Football's shame as Remembrance Sunday silence is scrapped after nine seconds when Celtic football fans chant pro-IRA songs through it Why IS Starmer attending COP29 summit? PM faces demands for UK to pay into $1TRILLION climate fund as he heads to Azerbaijan despite leaders from US, Germany, EU, China and India staying away One of the founders of world's oldest Breastfeeding support charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - and says organisation has 'become a travesty of my original intent' Woman loses £20,000 in fake TV licensing scam after conman fooled her into using WhatsApp screen sharing so he could see what was on her phone Donald Trump Jr suggests his President-elect father will cut off aid to Ukraine with meme telling Zelensky 'you're 38 days from losing your allowance' Keir Starmer and Emmanuel Macron's crisis summit on how to deal with Trump: PM and French leader plan for US trade war, the end of Pentagon defence handouts and Ukraine peace deal Primary school teacher, 57, took fatal overdose after being urged to 'find a new hobby' by her GP to battle her depression, inquest hears Trump announces his new 'border czar' Tom Homan to lead the biggest mass deportation in U.S. history Mother, 54, who bled to death during botched gastric stomach operation in Turkey had turned to surgery because she could not buy another course of Ozempic, inquest hears How undercover cops posing as lorry drivers pulled off Britain's biggest drugs bust EVER after finding two tonnes of cocaine worth £186m hidden in cargo of bananas from Colombia Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after Australian authorities tore up her visa Pictured: Schoolgirl, 12, who tragically died after being hit by falling tree branch as devastated family pay tribute to 'shining light' Justin Welby 'has lost confidence of the clergy': Archbishop of Canterbury facing mounting pressure to quit for 'ignoring' sex abuse by Church of England's most prolific abuser Moment girl wearing headphones is run over by a train while crossing tracks - and somehow survives with minor injuries School Head of English wants Shakespeare axed for GCSEs because it 'sends pupils and teachers to sleep' and TikTok and Instagram posts studied instead MOST READ IN DETAIL Advertisement NEW ARTICLESHomeTop Share Back to top Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Sitemap Archive Video Archive Authors Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Money Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group dmg media Contact us How to complain Leadership Team Advertise with us Contributors Terms Subscription Terms & Conditions Do not sell or share my personal information About MailOnline Privacy Settings Privacy policy & cookies Advertisement AdvertisementAussie dad of three, 37, dies after catching the flu HOME MAIL NEWS FINANCE SPORT LIFESTYLE ENTERTAINMENT WEATHER MORE... Yahoo News Search query Sign in Mail Sign in to view your emails News Latest National Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide Perth World Environment … AdvertisementClose this contentRead full articleYahoo News AustraliaAussie dad of three, 37, dies after catching the fluFriends are rallying behind the three young boys and grieving wife left behind after the sudden death of Canberra man Mate Babic.Brianne Tolj·Associate News Editor Updated 14 July 2023 at 3:46 pm·3-min readLink copiedA 37-year-old Canberra father has become the latest victim of Australia’s deadly flu season, leaving behind a heartbroken wife and three young sons.Mate Babic “tragically and unexpectedly” died after complications with influenza B, close friends of the couple said in a GoFundMe created on Thursday to help support his three “beautiful” boys — aged 3, 6 and 7 — and wife Carla Babic.“As we gather to mourn this profound loss, we recognise that in addition to the emotional toll, there are practical challenges that lie ahead for the family,” the GoFundMe reads.Mate Babic 'tragically and unexpectedly' died this week after complications with influenza B. Source: GoFundMe“We have started this campaign to rally support for Carla and their children. Our goal is to provide them with a financial safety net that will alleviate the immediate strain of funeral arrangement costs, household expenses, mortgage repayments, raising three boys on her own and give them some breathing room to navigate this difficult time.”Family worried about losing homeThe most pressing concern for Mate’s family is keeping their family home, which he built himself, but still requires work.“Building the home was Mate's way of providing for the family. It would be absolutely devastating to lose it,” the friends said, noting his widow’s “profound grief”. “Every donation, no matter the size, will make a tangible impact on their lives and show Carla that she is not alone in this journey.Friends are rallying around the widow and her sons as they grieve. Source: Facebook“Together, we can make a difference and ensure that this beautiful family can stay in their home and focus on healing and rebuilding their lives.”Friends have paid tribute to their “good friend” who was “taken away too soon” online, one of which said he passed away on Wednesday.Influenza B strain surgingThe news comes just days after it was confirmed an 11-year-old Queensland girl and a Year 9 student from the NSW Central Coast also recently died from the influenza B strain.Emma Schwab, from Noosa, died last Thursday in Sunshine Coast University Hospital after contracting the disease. It’s understood she had sought private treatment for the illness before presenting to hospital.There has been a reported 37 per cent increase in NSW emergency department presentations with influenza-like illness, and a 30 per cent increase in admissions to hospital in the week to July 2, compared to the previous week.Aussie dad, 25, dies after collapsing at home with common infectionAussie boy’s life-saving transplant now threatens to kill himMelbourne dad who suffered brain haemorrhage in Bali diesChildren under 16 represented about half (54 per cent) of all ED presentations for influenza-like illness, and more than a third (around 40 per cent) of all influenza-like illness hospital admissions in the past week.Queensland Chief Health Officer John Gerrard said this week the state had experienced an influenza A wave leading into winter, but influenza B had taken over as the dominant strain in July. “There have been three times more hospital admissions for influenza B than influenza A in children aged less than five years,” Dr Gerrard said in a statement.with AAP and NCA NewsWireDo you have a story tip? Email: newsroomau@yahoonews.com.You can also follow us on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok and Twitter and download the Yahoo News app from the App Store or Google Play.Up nextUp nextUp nextUp nextLatest storiesHuffPostAuthoritarianism Expert Shatters A Trump ‘Illusion’: ‘One Of The Biggest Scams Of All’Ruth Ben-Ghiat said this reason for voting for Trump would have “very sad” consequences.HuffPostDonald Trump Jr.’s ‘Disgusting’ Taunt Of Ukraine's Zelenskyy Is Slammed OnlinePresident-elect Donald Trump's son was ripped as "vile." Why this ad?I don't like this adGo ad-free* The Daily BeastSick King Charles Can’t Control Prince Andrew and Prince WilliamElderly and sick king revealed as powerless Cancer-struck King Charles looked an isolated monarch Sunday as he attended a pivotal veterans’ memorial event in London without his wife, Queen Camilla, who is fighting a chest infection, after a series of casual humiliations inflicted by his brother, Prince Prince Andrew, and his son, Prince William. William, in an intervention that would have been unthinkable before the king‘s cancer diagnosis, set out plans for a dramatic change of tone in his reigHarper's BazaarMegan Fox Announces Fourth Pregnancy with Grungy Nude Photo ShootThe happy news comes a year after the actor revealed she suffered a miscarriage.Yahoo Sport AustraliaPat Cummins cops backlash as legends rip cricket captain over photo with wife at concertThe Australian captain's decision has come under fire. Read more here. Why this ad?I don't like this adGo ad-free* Yahoo News AustraliaElon Musk's 'odd' Donald Trump move, 'relentless stormy weather' for millions: Australia news liveFollow along for all the stories that matter to the everyday Aussie.The IndependentNikki Haley responds to Trump’s announcement that she’s not welcome back in his second administrationTrump publicly batted down Haley and Pompeo as he plans his future cabinetParadeDemi Moore, 62, Flaunts Toned Body With Teeny-Tiny Bikini in New VideoThe star of 'The Substance' showed off what she's got while celebrating a special occasion. Why this ad?I don't like this adGo ad-free* CosmoMaya Jama just referenced the sexiest naked dress of the 90sMaya Jama just strutted down the MTV EMAs 2024 red carpet while wearing the Versace safety pin dress made famous by Liz Hurley in 1994BuzzFeedHugh Grant's Real Name Is Causing Quadruple TakesNo wonder he's grumpy all of the time.The Daily BeastConspiracies Run Wild as It’s Reported Kate Never Had CancerConspiracy theories surrounding Kate Middleton’s cancer diagnosis and recovery have erupted online again, after a report by a respected and accredited royal reporter suggested the Princess of Wales never had cancer but was instead found to have “pre-cancerous cells.” Vicious rumors perpetrated by online trolls alleging that Kate either faked or exaggerated her cancer to cover up personal difficulties have been turbocharged by the claim. When Kate announced she had cancer in March 2024, she said Why this ad?I don't like this adGo ad-free* Yahoo Sport AustraliaPayne Haas delivers dagger to Kevin Walters with eye-opening comments about Broncos cultureThe comments don't paint the former Broncos coach in the best light. More here.Yahoo News AustraliaWarning over 'toxic' plant commonly sold in Australia: 'Can be dangerous'The vibrant, exotic plant is a favourite among keen Aussie gardeners, but many may not know of the danger it poses.The Daily BeastMusk Turning Himself Into the ‘Guest Who Wouldn’t Leave’ at Mar-a-LagoAfter all that election night excitement, it seems Elon Musk just doesn’t want to go home. Multiple sources have told CNN that amid the post-victory buzz around Mar-a-Lago, the Tesla CEO has been at Donald Trump’s Florida resort almost every single day over the past week, with Instagram posts under the location tag showing him dining with the president-elect and his wife on Sunday, as well as spending time on the grounds with his son over the weekend. “Dining with him on the patio at times, toda Why this ad?I don't like this adGo ad-free* Yahoo Sport AustraliaMatty Johns delivers harsh reality check for Reece Walsh in massive prediction about BroncosReece Walsh will be pivotal to Brisbane's success in 2025. Read more here.WWDCharlize Theron Puts High Fashion Spin on Denim in Plunging Schiaparelli Corset Dress at the 2024 Baby2Baby GalaTheron was honored with the Giving Tree Award.Yahoo Sport AustraliaJames Hird in massive career turn as AFL world left saddened over news about Tim WatsonJames Hird and Tim Watson are both Essendon legends. Read more here. Why this ad?I don't like this adGo ad-free* InStyleMegan Fox Announces Pregnancy By Posing Nude While Covered in Black PaintShe shared the news with an emotional nod to Machine Gun Kelly.Hello!'Devastated' Jamie Oliver apologises for 'damaging' children's book as he withdraws it from saleJamie Oliver has been forced to withdraw a children's book he wrote after it was criticised for "causing offence" to First Nation Australians. More details...Australian Associated PressJail for man who exit-trafficked wife 'as a chattel'The first Victorian to face court charged with exit-trafficking has been thrown behind bars for up to four-and-a-half years for abandoning his wife in Sudan.More storiesCould bird flu be the next Covid? Why experts are worried after two new human cases are confirmed in Britain | The Standard The Standard Sign in NewsSportBusinessLifestyleCultureGoing OutHomes & PropertyComment LifestyleCould bird flu be the next Covid? Why experts are worried after two new human cases are confirmed in BritainPet owners are being urged to keep cats indoors and dogs on a leash after two poultry workers became the fourth and fifth Brits to become infected with bird flu this week — so how worried should we be about the virus? Katie Strick reports Avian flu is capable of crossing over to humans ESKatie Strick, Senior Feature Writer & Editor @katie_strick14 July 2023Dr Charles Levinson leans back in his chair. It would be easy to dismiss the whole thing as scaremongering: experts warning that we could be sleepwalking into a new pandemic after an 11-year-old Cambodian girl and a 56-year-old Chinese woman died with avian influenza — more commonly known as bird flu — earlier this year. Even more worrying is the news that the same strain of bird flu has now made it onto UK shores, with two poultry workers this week becoming the fourth and fifth Brits to become infected with the H5N1 strain since the latest outbreak took off in October 2021.The UK Health Security Agency confirmed the two positive cases this week, just weeks after two other British poultry workers tested positive in May and Alan Gosling, a retired engineer in Devon who kept ducks at home, caught the virus in early 2022 after his ducks became infected. But Levinson and his fellow health professionals have been here before. When a sprinkling of Covid cases were first reported in China in December 2019, it was easy to dismiss those too. And look at us now: a pandemic and 6.8 million deaths later, still clashing over the cause of the outbreak (was it leaked from a lab in Wuhan or a Chinese wet market?), still fighting about whether it was right to impose a lockdown, still wondering if we should have seen it coming earlier. Officials say the Cambodian girl, named as Bean Narong from the southeastern province of Prey Veng, was the first known human infection of the H5N1 strain of bird flu in the country since 2014 — and the eighth globally since the current wave started in October 2021, hitting 76 countries, triggering national emergencies and leading to the worst animal disease outbreak in US history. According to the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), more than 140 million poultry have died from the virus or been slaughtered to stop it spreading, and humans have tested positive in countries including China, India, Spain, the US and the UK. Avian flu has now been confirmed in mammals (PA)PA WireNarong, the youngest of four siblings and a so-called star student who wanted to become a doctor, had reportedly fallen ill with a high fever, coughing and throat pain six days before her death. She lived close to a conservation area and experts have since confirmed that the infection came from poultry, though she did not have the widely circulating variant. Narong’s father Bou Vorn, 49, also tested positive for the virus but did not display any major symptoms, and growing numbers of infections have also been reported in mammals, including dolphins, leopards and grizzly bears overseas and at a large mink farm in Spain. Here in the UK, cases have been reported in foxes and otters as well as birds, with councils in London and other cities now warning the public against feeding birds in parks and the government proposing new rules that those who keep chickens in their gardens will have to register them first. European health chiefs are also urging pet owners to keep cats indoors and dogs on a leash.Read MoreChris Packham urges mandatory policies for farmers to protect natureBird flu outbreak at breeding colony ‘devastating news’ for Arctic ternsScientists identify gene that protects humans against bird flu virusesProfessor Neil Ferguson, the man whose modelling was instrumental in the first Covid lockdown, is said to be working on a Covid-style model for a bird flu pandemic following warnings from WHO that it poses the biggest pandemic threat to the world after Covid. Officials in London are reportedly drawing up contingency plans in case the problem escalates — so how worried should we be about the virus jumping to humans in the UK? Can it be passed from human-to-human? And should we be preparing for this to escalate into a full-blown pandemic?Among health experts, the answer seems to be a loud and resounding yes. We should be preparing. Not because a pandemic is likely, but because a low risk doesn’t mean there’s no risk — and even if bird flu doesn’t result in a global pandemic this time, that’s not to say it won’t in the future. “It’s not a matter of if, but when, we have a flu pandemic,” says Levinson, a London-based GP and medical director at urgent private healthcare service Doctorcall. He’s been watching bird flu closely for 15 years and says a bird flu pandemic isn’t exactly inevitable, but that all the elements are in place: an unprecedented outbreak in a developing country; rising cases in developed countries; a sprinkling of human infections; a lack of human vaccine. Does the spread of bird flu to mammals mean a greater risk to humans?Owen Humphreys/PA ArchiveProfessor Peter Openshaw, a former SAGE adviser who advises the government on new and emerging threats from respiratory viruses, agrees. Just because the world is still experiencing a Covid pandemic, it is no less likely to experience a new pandemic coming from elsewhere. “We absolutely need to watch this one,” he said earlier this year. “The good news at the moment is that there’s no evidence of human-to-human spread. We need to prepare for the worst but obviously hope for the best.”Dr Quinton Fivelman, chief scientific officer at the London Medical Lab, says part of the problem with bird flu is that the public have got “used to outbreaks on poultry farms” over the last 25 years. But we mustn’t be complacent: the virus is highly contagious – even a gust of wind can carry it via bird dropppings – and can quickly spread around the world via migrating birds. It has a 100 per cent mortality rate in chickens and poultry farmers routinely destroy entire flocks if even a single case is found.Concerningly, 53 per cent of the 860 known human cases since 2003 have been fatal and experts are warning that the seasonality they used to observe with bird flu “isn’t there any more”. Gregorio Torres, WOAH’s head of science, says the virus used to be typified by sporadic seasonal outbreaks but many countries where outbreaks are common are now reporting cases throughout the year. Free-range eggs will return to supermarket shelves in the coming days as restrictions preventing the spread of bird flu have started to lift (Yui Mok/PA)PA WireThis latest outbreak — the deadliest on record — has resulted in tragic outcomes: millions of tame and wild birds have died across the world over the last year, particularly in America, which has seen the worst animal disease outbreak in US history, with losses of close to 60 million birds and whispered talks about a controversial move to vaccinate all commercial chickens, laying hens, turkeys and ducks (it could trigger trade bans that would crush the country’s export market). In Peru, the disease has killed more than 3,500 South American sea lions – three per cent of the animals’ Peruvian population – after it was brought in by pelicans, and whole flocks of swans have died here in the UK. Since Narong’s death in Cambodia, TV producers revealed they had changed filming plans for David Attenborough because of fears he might catch bird flu from wild bird species while shooting his Wild Isles series in Britain. Human bird flu symptoms include a very high temperature, aching muscles, a headache and a cough or shortness of breath. Infectious disease experts warned that the 96-year-old would probably die if he caught it. So far, all the known human cases of bird flu are believed to have caught it from birds or dead birds and there is no evidence that this strain has spread between people. One of the Chinese victims had eaten chicken shortly before experiencing symptoms; the other had come into contact with live birds. But “while the evidence suggests that the virus does not pass easily to people, there is an increased chance of people coming into contact with the virus due to the high levels in birds”, says David Heymann, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. “So far no strain has emerged that sustains transmission between humans … that would be needed to create a pandemic.” Tesco has joined other supermarkets in limiting purchases of eggs because of shortages supply disruptionYui Mok/PA ArchiveBut while WHO’s chief scientist, Jeremy Farrar, says the threat of human-to-human transmission is “low”, it’s not impossible. That’s what happened with Covid, Levinson points out. “We’re only one mutation away from human-to-human transmission – and that mutation is more likely to happen after it’s got into a person, which it already has,” he says. “Nobody can predict when or where that mutation will happen, but at some point it’s bound to.”Farrah, one of the world’s leading scientists, agrees. “Imagine, tomorrow morning at nine o’clock there’s a report that there’s 100 people admitted to a hospital somewhere with a nasty respiratory virus, and it happens to be H5N1,” he told a briefing in London a few months ago. “That’s my concern; that we’re in slow motion watching something which may never happen but if it were to happen, would we look back and say, ‘Why didn’t we do more?’ You would hate to look back in the midst of an H5N1 pandemic and say: ‘Hold on, didn’t we watch this avian population die all over the world and we started to see mammals dying and what did we do about it?’” Farrar says bird flu’s jump to mammals should be a klaxon call for government action. What he and his fellow health experts would like to see governments do is the following: investing in developing vaccines for every strain of flu that exists in animals; stockpiling more antivirals and PPE (and creating manufacturing capacity to ramp this up); improving biosecurity in farms and markets; and encouraging other governments to do the same – particularly those in developing countries, where poultry are more likely to live in close quarters with humans. “It’s very important lots of people don’t catch it,” says Levinson. “When lots of people have it [which is more likely in developing countries], that’s where the virus has the selective advantage. So the key thing is containing it abroad.”The case was detected on the Isle of Anglesey, off north WalesJoe Giddens/PA WireDr Fivelman agrees it is concerning there is no human vaccine for bird flu yet, as the higher number of cases means the higher the chances of a mutation. Even if we did have a vaccine and there was an outbreak in Europe, the Middle East, America or Mexico tomorrow, Farrah says it would impossible to vaccinate the world within 2023. But wouldn’t it be a waste of time and money developing a vaccine, if it never escalates into a pandemic? Absolutely not, says Farrah. “If [a human bird flu outbreak] doesn’t happen, you haven’t lost, because you’ve still got those [vaccines].” Experts are slowly rallying. WHO-affiliated labs already have samples of two flu virus strains that closely resemble the current H5N1 virus, so these could be used by vaccine manufacturers to create a human vaccine. And several producers of seasonal flu vacines, such as GSK, have already started early testing. WHO says having these strains prepared could help to shave two months off vaccine development if it does go ahead, but acting quickly enough would still be a challenge. “We are more prepared (than for Covid),” says WHO’s director of global infectious hazard prepardness, Sylvie Briand. “But even if we are more prepared, we are not yet prepared enough. We need to really continue the efforts for a flu pandemic.”Millions of captive birds have either died of bird flu or been culled for disease control, Defra said (Danny Lawson/PA)PA ArchiveTo its credit, the British Government has made some early steps towards this worst case scenario. The UK Health Security Agency is currently making plans to deploy lateral flow tests that would work for bird flu – they already have some for regular flu, but not the avian strain – and it is also exploring the development of blood tests to detect antibodies against the virus. The agency is also reported to be modelling how many people might become infected and display symptoms, whether lateral flow tests and blood tests would actually be effective, and which genetic mutations might signal an increased risk to human health. So what can we as members of the public do in the meantime? Levinson’s advice is not to be scared, but to educate and prepare yourself as well as possible. He recommends being wary of handling dead birds in the wild, keeping cats indoors and dogs on a leash, and saying yes to the regular flu jab if you’re offered it this winter or next, as it is likely that this will “pre-charge the immune system”, preparing the body for what might hit it if it did get infected with bird flu. His remaining piece of advice is understanding “that pandemics are things that can happen, that they’re not going to wipe us all out and that we just need to be a bit sensible” – but not overreacting and getting into the “mass panic” many got into at the start of the Covid pandemic. He hopes that governments won’t let the current economic crisis put them off stockpiling antivirals that might expire if the worst doesn’t happen, and will instead learn from Covid that the worst can happen and preparedness is key. His peer Peter Openshaw put it best himself: let’s prepare for the worst, “but hope for the best”. Create a FREE account to continue readingRegistration is a free and easy way to support our journalism.Join our community where you can: comment on stories; sign up to newsletters; enter competitions and access content on our app.* FIRST NAME* LAST NAME* EMAILYour email address* PASSWORDMust be at least 6 characters, include an upper and lower case character and a numberShow* YEAR OF BIRTHYou must be at least 18 years old to create an account20062005200420032002200120001999199819971996199519941993199219911990198919881987198619851984198319821981198019791978197719761975197419731972197119701969196819671966196519641963196219611960195919581957195619551954195319521951195019491948194719461945194419431942194119401939193819371936193519341933193219311930192919281927192619251924192319221921192019191918191719161915191419131912191119101909190819071906* Required fieldsI would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from Evening Standard. Read our privacy noticeCREATE ACCOUNTI'LL TRY LATERAlready have an account? SIGN INBy clicking Create Account you confirm that your data has been entered correctly and you have read and agree to our Terms of use , Cookie policy and Privacy policy . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.Thank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inMORE ABOUTbird fluBritainChinapandemicExpertscovid Have your say...VIEW COMMENTS Most Read 1 Lifestyle Stephen Fry, Chrissie Hynde and Sophie Winkleman sign letter protesting 5G advertising on the Tube 2 Lifestyle Why a Christmas advert has led to 'boycott Boots' trending online 3 Politics Nine boats carrying 572 people intercepted crossing the Channel 4 Football Manchester United: Who are Ruben Amorim's new assistant manager and coaches? 5 Football Enzo Maresca reveals Chelsea stance on Christopher Nkunku amid Manchester United 'interest' The StandardNewsSportBusinessLifestyleCultureGoing OutHomes & PropertyCommentThe London StandardArchiveAll TopicsAll AuthorsNewslettersTerms of useContact UsModern Slavery ActSyndicationPrivacy NoticePrivacy OptionsCookie PolicyCode of conduct and complaintsAdvertisersPromotion RulesContributorsLondon LiveThe IndependentThe Independent USindy100Family 'torn apart' after second girl suddenly dies after catching flu as cases surge in Australia | Daily Mail Online Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Best Buys Discounts Black Friday My Profile Logout Login Breaking News Australia Video University Guide China Debate Meghan Markle Prince Harry King Charles III Weather Most read My Profile Logout Login Privacy Policy Feedback Tuesday, Nov 12th 2024 12PM 17°C 3PM 17°C 5-Day Forecast Advertisement Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the flagship show: Former England ace Alex Scott among the front-runners… and there are some VERY leftfield options Revealed - Putin 'was so close to launching a nuke in Ukraine that British officials started preparing for the UK to be hit by the deadly fallout': Shock news comes as Russia 'plans to up drone attacks in coming days following US election' Founder of world's oldest breastfeeding charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - saying it has become 'a travesty' that 'indulges the fantasies of adults' The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS asks... why did no one in authority tell the police about the abuse by top barrister who exchanged Christmas cards with Justin Welby for years? Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more serious condition which affects up to two in three women The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make a difference, these are the ones that do Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said it was just $250,000 in cash. I'm STUNNED it was actually £15m of cocaine - it's so unfair I face 60 years in US jail, says Brit beautician How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving one of the world's biggest killers can actually have a protective effect RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be mad Teenagers in Jewish youth football team 'attacked by knife-wielding pro-Palestine mob in Berlin' as violence breaks out in Amsterdam amid 'Jew hunt' Two mothers who 'refused to quarantine' in hotels after flying to Dubai to get boob jobs face prison sentence after losing Irish court battle against Covid pandemic policy The Skegness property gold rush: It's rated the world's worst holiday resort, but 'Skeggy' is now creating a new seaside millionaires' row to rival Sandbanks Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having intimate meal with family Yorkshire's Strongest Man contestant was filmed lifting a Ford Transit van with his bare hands while claiming a car crash had left him unable to carry shopping bags in 'blatantly dishonest' insurance claim Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new Assisted dying bill Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales World's oldest joke shop which supplied fake moustaches, magic wands and whoopee cushions to generations of youngsters is forced to close after 138 years in business Middle class misery SPREADS! After pan-demonium over Le Creuset sale, now Britain is running out of taramasalata! Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change - as he arrives in Azerbaijan for COP29 climate summit Previous Next Little Emma, 11, dies from the flu leaving her family 'torn apart' - after a 15-year-old girl also died from the virus as cases surgeEmma Schwab, 11, died last Thursday after contracting Influenza BA GoFundMe page says her family are 'torn apart' by her tragic deathBy MAX AITCHISON FOR DAILY MAIL AUSTRALIA Published: 08:51 GMT, 12 July 2023 | Updated: 09:03 GMT, 12 July 2023 e-mail 152 shares 56 View comments A devastated family has been 'torn apart' after their 11-year-old daughter died from the flu, as warnings intensify over the dangers of influenza B among young children this winter. Emma Schwab, 11, from Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast, died last Thursday after contracting Influenza B. A GoFundMe page, set up by a friend of the girl's parents to cover her funeral costs, has so far raised almost $9,000. Emma Schwab (pictured), 11, from Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast, died last Thursday after contracting Influenza B Emma pictured with her mum Javiera 'Emma tragically passed away on Thursday from Influenza B,' wrote the GoFundMe organiser Mel Horton. 'She was only 11 years old. Understandably the family is torn apart.'A Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health spokesperson, where Emma was treated, offered 'sincere sympathies to the family during this extremely difficult time'.'Their experience is heartbreaking for everyone involved,' they said.'Our clinicians are providing support to the family.'Emma's death comes after a teenage girl from the Central Coast also died after contracting Influenza B.The Year 9 student attended St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford and passed away on the weekend after falling ill with the disease several weeks ago. Parents with children at the school received a letter informing them of the girl's tragic death, according to the ABC. '(She) was a well-loved student, thoughtful to the needs of others, a true friend and a valued member of our college community,' the letter read. NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant has urged parents to get their children vaccinated against flu A teenage girl from the Central Coast also died after contracting Influenza. The Year 9 student attended St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford (pictured) and passed away on the weekend after falling ill with the disease several weeks agoInfluenza cases have been surging across the Central Coast and NSW over the past month, particularly among children. Those aged 16 and under represent 54 per cent of all emergency department admissions for influenza-like illness over the last week, with NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant labelling the spike 'concerning'.'In recent weeks we have seen influenza cases rising fastest among very young children as well as those aged five to 16 years, with these two age groups often accounting for around half of all flu cases diagnosed in NSW each week,' said Dr Chant.'Sadly, our children’s hospitals are seeing an increasing number of these children being admitted for care and some of these patients are seriously unwell.Dr Chant urged parents to get their children vaccinated against flu to reduce the risk of them being hospitalised. Since May, 16 children have been admitted to intensive care with life-threatening complications from influenza at Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead and John Hunter Hospital. Doctors say these can include serious heart, brain, and muscle-related complications. QueenslandFlu Share or comment on this article: Family 'torn apart' after second girl suddenly dies after catching flu as cases surge in Australia e-mail 152 shares Most watched News videos Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach 91-year-old woman pushed down subway stairs by 'immigrant' robber Princess Kate observes Remembrance Sunday parade at Whitehall Jill Biden sits next to Kamala Harris at Arlington National Cemetery 2019: Tom Homan takes on AOC in heated exchange Narinder Kaur apologises for 'stupid' tweet about Kate Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach Moment Donald Trump snubs Ivanka for Elon in family portrait CCTV captures final moments before woman is mauled to death Joe Biden appears to wipe away tears at Arlington National Cemetery Shocking moment girl wearing headphones is hit and run over by train Moment King Charles lay a wreath and salutes on Remembrance Sunday Comments 53 Share what you think Newest Oldest Best rated Worst rated View all The comments below have been moderated in advance. View all The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline. We are no longer accepting comments on this article. Bing Site Web Enter search term: Search DON'T MISS Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the show Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump She's expecting I'm A Celeb's Coleen Rooney reveals vast list of instructions to look after her four children on two HUGE boards during her jungle stint EXCLUSIVECher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Britney Spears reunites with son Jayden, 18, after years of estrangement and move to Hawaii Reestablishing their bond Laundry legend or sock-shrinking disaster? Share this quiz with your loved ones so they can identify their bad household habits - and change them for good! Ad Feature Liam Payne's $9,500-a-month mansion he moved into with girlfriend Kate Cassidy weeks before his death is back on the rental market Kate's chic tweaks to refashion old looks: From velvet bows to hemlines and even a sari, how she makes recycled look fresh Maura Higgins enjoys final date night with new flame Pete Wicks before she heads to Australia for I'm A Celeb as a latecomer EXCLUSIVESuper soft hair in three easy steps: Simple routine provides up to 7x* more moisture for up to 72 hours** Ad Feature Iron Maiden star Paul Di'Anno's cause of death revealed after married father-of-six heavy metal singer passed away aged 66 EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Bizarre Alec Baldwin and wife Hilaria bring six of their children to the Spellbound premiere in New York City Family posed on the red carpet Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having a meal with family Find your inner glow: We asked one beauty writer to trial a new range of gentle skincare - here's how she got on Ad Feature EXCLUSIVEAerial photos show Leonardo DiCaprio's stunning eco-friendly compound is completed just in time for his 50th birthday Busta Rhymes praises 'superstar' Benny Hill as US rapper reveals he's a VERY unlikely fan of the saucy British comedian - after discovering him during childhood holidays in Morecambe Ralph Fiennes looks unrecognizable as he reunites with his The English Patient co-star Juliette Binoche for upcoming epic The Return I'm A Celebrity 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in first look snaps How understanding your glucose levels can help you feel less tired after meals Ad Feature Even the nepo babies are flocking to Australia! Celeb offspring join the exodus of Brits who prefer life Down Under EXCLUSIVETHE DUCHESS OF YORK: I'm on a mission to rid nappies of plastic - with my fifth grandchild on the way EXCLUSIVEPhil Foden's party-loving mother blasted by neighbours for 'deafening Disneyland two-hour fireworks display' Only Fools And Horses star Sir David Jason, 84, reveals he struggles to get parts because of his age Difficulties Looking to refresh your space before winter? Transform your home and interiors with these 10 top must-know brands Ad Feature Her Majesty The Queen: Behind Closed Doors review: Camilla's personality shone, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS Gary Lineker 'will QUIT Match of the Day at the end of the season' after 26 years presenting the show EXCLUSIVEMelvin Odoom is the SEVENTH star to land in Brisbane ahead of I'm A Celeb - as jungle-bound DJ shares first impression of Australian weather Nicolas Cage looks mysterious while dressed in character as he shoots upcoming Spider-Noir series on location in Los Angeles Damaged hair? Don't despair! With 1 billion bonds packed in every bottle, the NEW bond-building wonder product is here to help Ad Feature Coleen Nolan's son Jake Roche, 32, reveals he's going to be a dad in days as singer is forced to reschedule upcoming shows Chris Pratt and wife Katherine Schwarzenegger welcome their third child together and name has nod to JFK Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant slams current popular music as 'narcissistic and processed' as he throws shade at Oasis Coleen Rooney wears £1,060 silk pyjamas to jet out of UK airport for I'm A Celeb as she makes the most of luxury items Riviera glamour, Ibiza nightlife and the most stylish ships at sea: Why THIS is the ultimate cruise for your adults-only Mediterranean escape Ad Feature Aussie actress slams Rebel Wilson's 'absurd' claims she was sexually harassed by a producer on set of new film The Deb Popular British comedian and TV star shocks fans as he announces he's quitting Twitter for good Stepping back Kyle Richards 'terrified' to discuss 'evolving sexuality' with her kids amid Morgan Wade romance rumors Khloe Kardashian shows off her 27inch waistline in see-through nude lingerie as she announces new brand Trim physique Struggling to maintain your weight during menopause? You're not alone - here's why this happens and what you can do about it Ad Feature Inside Keith Urban's incredible $6.5m luxury car collection as his wife Nicole Kidman reveals the vehicle she likes to drive Austin Barnes and Matt Smith are surrounded by New York Mets fans on Caught Stealing set Channing Tatum enjoys a romantic stroll with co-star Kirsten Dunst on set of their upcoming film Roofman Benny Blanco sparks internet frenzy as he makes Sexiest Man Alive list amid Selena Gomez romance: 'He's redefining sexy!' BUSTED! The career-myths that are holding you back from success Advertising Megan Fox fans notice very specific astrological detail about her pregnancy announcement post with MGK EPHRAIM HARDCASTLE: Why did the late Queen miss out on a Nobel Peace Prize for transforming the Commonwealth? Bad Sisters star Sharon Horgan says she is glad the show made women feel like they weren't 'f***ing crazy' EXCLUSIVEMariah Carey's 5.5 inch custom sandals were designed to dazzle with over 10,000 hand-applied crystals EXCLUSIVEGive the gift of curiosity! Discover why the What on Earth! Magazine is the ultimate Christmas present for kids who love learning (and we have an offer) SHOPPING Nicole Scherzinger pictured wearing Kamala Harris shirt before 'coming out as a Trump supporter' Awkward MAFS UK's Polly Sellman and Adam Nightingale 'SPLIT' after explosive row as groom is branded a 'f*****g narcissist' Machine Gun Kelly's turbulent dating history laid bare as he prepares to welcome first child with Megan Fox Checkered past Bradley Cooper looks loved-up with Gigi Hadid in NYC after sparking shock with 'unrecognizable' face Smitten Who left the Big Brother house? Baked Potato is brutally sent home through the back door just days ahead of final Happy Monday's star Bez rocked out 'until 4am' after the MTV EMAs and 'showed Maya Jama how to party' Queen Camilla appears emotional as she speaks to domestic violence survivor in new documentary Powerful topic Keke Palmer claims costar made a racist remark to her on Ryan Murphy's Scream Queens series Allegations Coleen Rooney insists small food portions won't bother her on I'm A Celeb as she often 'misses a meal' and 'never gets hangry' Sting says Diddy allegations don't 'taint' Every Breath You Take - after disgraced rapper sampled song Nonplussed Kristin Chenoweth addresses Sean 'Diddy' Combs sex trafficking allegations with unusual response Rapper is under arrest The inventive way Megan Fox hid her baby bump at Halloween bash before pregnancy reveal with MGK Secret Yellowstone stars 'still processing' popular show's devastating ending - after bombshell season return Jane Moore shares the poignant reason she finally decided to say yes to I'm A Celebrity - and reveals her TWO big phobias The REAL reason Chris Martin kisses the tarmac before he flies after Coldplay frontman was seen planting his lips to the ground Leonardo DiCaprio rings in 50th birthday with Vittoria Ceretti, 26, at second star-studded dinner party Night out Loose Women icon 'set to reprise legendary role in Waterloo Road' as she returns to her soap roots Returning to the show Cast of iconic kids' TV show send fans wild with 'nostalgia overload' as they reunite 25 years after first episode Legendary Jeopardy! host Ken Jennings reveals major show update in off-camera admission He made an off-camera admission David Duchovny reveals 'failure of friendship' with The X-Files co-star Gillian Anderson amid tension on hit show Queen Camilla praised for 'moving' and 'powerful' ITV documentary on domestic abuse Positive response Legendary rocker hits back at John Farnham claim their former manager 'drugged me for years' Not happy EXCLUSIVEBrian Austin Green's surprising reaction to ex-wife Megan Fox's pregnancy with Machine Gun Kelly Unexpected Leggy Millie Mackintosh stuns in a black chic minidress as she joins husband Hugo Taylor at book launch As stylish as always Line Of Duty star Adrian Dunbar 'CONFIRMS' show's return: 'When they announce it, it's going to burn up the internet!' EXCLUSIVEWhat's really going with Euphoria? Cancelation rumors spark after Zendaya is cast in Christopher Nolan film Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly's ROLLERCOASTER romance timeline: From pregnancy to drinking each other's blood LL Cool J 'chased Monty Don to ask for a selfie as rapper reveals himself to be a VERY unlikely fan of the BBC horticulturist' GK Barry spills the beans on Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's awkward Instagram gaffe - as she prepares for I'm A Celeb Cat Deeley is criticised by viewers after unfortunate gaffe during Remembrance Day segment on This Morning I'm A Celebrity's Tulisa admits she 'doesn't want to draw attention' in jungle by recreating Myleene Klass' bikini moment EXCLUSIVEThe real reason Ben Affleck always looks 'miserable' The actor always manages to look downcast Emily Watson catches the eye in a graphic gown as she joins chic co-star Olivia Williams at VIP screening of DUNE: Prophecy Megan Fox and MGK fans react to pregnancy reveal eight months after pair ENDED engagement Delighted How England Lioness Chloe Kelly went from goofy teen to glamorous red carpet regular - and the £350 beauty treatment she swears by Travis Kelce and Taylor Swift joined by surprise sports superstar in Chiefs VIP suite as new images emerge EXCLUSIVEColeen Rooney to be greeted by her four sons on the I'm A Celebrity bridge after husband Wayne is forced to stay behind Jessica Simpson hints Eric Johnson marriage is OVER as she admits she 'put up' with things she 'did not deserve' Lizzie Cundy, 56, puts on a leggy display as she follows in Jennifer Lopez's footsteps and undergoes a HydraFacial EXCLUSIVEBBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he change Tube's 5G advertising Luann de Lesseps, 59, reveals which A-List actor she made out with and how she is a member of the Mile High Club I'm A Celeb star Oti Mabuse reveals she is taking part on the gruelling ITV show to 'catch up on sleep' after giving birth to her first child last year Timothee Chalamet reveals the feature he was told would prevent him from succeeding in Hollywood Huge star The View panel fiercely defend Nicole Scherzinger over Russell Brand's election hat Speaking out Queen Silvia of Sweden stuns in deep purple ensemble as she joins King Carl XVI Gustaf for award ceremony in Stockholm Coleen Rooney gives a subtle nod to her Wagatha Christie trial against Rebekah Vardy as she prepares for I'm A Celebrity Strictly sends viewers wild as it reveals comedian ie FIRST confirmed for festive special as he jokes he's about to 'ruin Christmas' EXCLUSIVEColeen's one last night with Wayne! Rooney insisted on taking the last possible flight to Australia ahead of her I'm A Celeb stint Travis Kelce's ex Kayla Nicole makes wild accusation against Taylor Swift Nicole dated Kelce on and off for five years before his romance with Swift James McAvoy is seen for the first time on the Glasgow set of his new film California Schemin' about hoax rappers Silibil N' Brains EXCLUSIVEMadonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris It looks like Madonna is no longer crazy for her recent toyboy Demi Moore, 62, shows off her bikini body as she wishes 2lb dog Pilaf a happy birthday Kevin Costner breaks silence on Yellowstone's John Dutton being killed off in Season 5 part two premiere Cash-strapped Diddy is renting out his private jet for $432k-a-flight as sex trial looms Troubled rapper is trying to generate cash Benny Blanco dishes on VERY romantic mornings with Selena Gomez as he makes People's Sexiest Man Alive issue Katy Perry brutally trolled after sharing her pick for the year's best film Got more than she bargained for Prince Harry pens heartfelt message of 'admiration and appreciation' for his 'fellow veterans' on Remembrance Day Charles grins as he welcomes King of Bahrain to Windsor Castle with a warm hug Charles is hosting Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa As Philip Schofield lays his 'extraordinary loyal' mother Pat to rest, friends tell how she became his rock after his TV downfall, reveals KATIE HIND BBC drops first trailer for Return to Paradise and finally confirms release date for Death in Paradise spin-off series Coming soon The Wheel fans blast mortified Helen Flanagan for getting 'very simple' question wrong - but do you know the answer? Dexys Midnight Runners original member dead: Andy Leek passes away aged 66 following long battle with Parkinson's disease just days after tying the knot Shirtless Romeo Beckham shows off his ripped physique as he enjoys getaway with pals - after confirming romance with Gray Sorrenti Cher: The night I took a drunken John Lennon to the Playboy mansion - and he stripped stark naked in front of me in the infamous secret Grotto Barry McGuigan is the SIXTH star to touch down in Australia ahead of his I'm A Celeb stint and jokes he's 'there to sign his next big fighter' Ex Big Brother star Narinder Kaur faces furious backlash for saying Kate Middleton has 'aged so much' as princess returns to royal duties Gary Barlow is dwarfed by best friend musician Eliot Kennedy as the pair share a boozy bath on the Take That star's wine tour series Eamonn Holmes takes shocking swipe at GB News co-star's appearance as sexism debate takes personal turn - and she warns 'back off!' Laverne Cox breaks silence on whether she'll leave US after Trump's election win Opened up about the possibility of leaving Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker transform into Morticia and Gomez Addams for new Halloween posts Getting into character Damian Lewis is criticised for his conduct during Wolf Hall interview after he confessed the role has 'worn him down' Mission Impossible 8 FIRST LOOK: Tom Cruise's Ethan Hunt dangles from a glider in trailer as title for long-delayed conclusion is finally revealed Cruz Beckham, 19, and girlfriend Jackie Apostel, 29, enjoy another public display of affection as they share a passionate kiss Netflix fans rave over 'gripping' crime thriller based on true story 'full of twists and turns' - praising 'excellent acting and an unpredictable ending' Gladiator II review: This sequel falls short of its masterpiece predecessor but is still heaps of farfetched and ferocious fun Deal Or No Deal fans blast ITV bosses for 'killing' the show with big change to Stephen Mulhern's reboot Not happy Chappell Roan has shock four word response to report about her split from management Speaking out EXCLUSIVEPregnant Charlotte Dawson details how she's learning to forgive fiancé Matthew Sarsfield's sexting scandal as she insists that it would have been 'easier to walk away' Kristin Cavallari's ex Mark Estes 'proposes' to Love Island star after hanging out with former girlfriend Marriage plans Chris Evans continues to wow with bookish new look as he promotes Red One in NYC Looking good Yellowstone fans confused after Kevin Costner appears in credits for season five part two despite departure Melissa Suffield jiggles around in a pink bikini as she hits back at cruel trolls and urges to acknowledge the 'reality of everyday bodies' Kyle Richards gives BFF Teddi Mellencamp divorce advice amid Edwin Arroyave split At different stages in their divorces Paul Mescal reveals his 'heartbeat is going through the f***ing roof' as he arrives at the Gladiator II premiere in his hometown Dublin with his family Jennifer Meyer, 47, flashes her $500K diamond engagement ring from billionaire Geoffrey Ogunlesi, 33 Pricey Moment Laurence Fox rescued his fiancee's dog Rocky after pet Jack Russell got trapped in hole underground EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celebrity contestants are set to be battered by freak storms and torrential rain as bad weather threatens to 'ruin' the series Katie Price appears to reignite bitter feud with Emily Atack as she makes snide 'fishy' dig AGAIN in front of huge audience at The Clapham Grand The Day Of The Jackal star Ursula Corbero star sends fans wild with her racy social media snaps after revealing she was 'confused' by her 'weak' role Livid Loose Women fans urge James Martin to 'move with the times' after 'daft, money-wasting' cooking confession on ITV show Moment country star SCREAMS as she falls and takes out her guitarist mid-show Performing in Helotes, Texas on Friday Diana Vickers sets pulses racing in a skimpy gold bikini as she soaks up the sun on lavish Ibiza getaway Sofia Richie is 17 years YOUNGER than sister Nicole Richie but they look the same age in rare photo Raye and LL Cool J look all partied out as they leave Manchester after MTV EMAs - where the British singer was named Best UK & Ireland artist Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright enjoy Majorca getaway with Olly Murs after admitting they're in the 'boring phase of their relationship' Taylor Swift fans furious over savage Jeopardy! clue about Travis Kelce On the program's official Instagram account Iskra Lawrence is praised for sharing footage of her homebirth after welcoming baby daughter 'P. P' Wolf Hall leaves viewers 'traumatised' with 'brutal' execution scene just minutes into BBC premiere as they beg 'please don't show that again!' Rebekah Vardy sets tongues wagging as she packs for mystery trip abroad and posts a teasing emoji - as nemesis WAG Coleen Rooney jets off to Australia for I'm A Celeb Antiques Roadshow guest gasps 'I could cry!' as he learns staggering value of sculpture he bought for just £50 and was using as a DOORSTOP How Alison Hammond's turbulent love life influenced her debut novel, from cheating scandals to surprise encounters at a massage parlour Coleen Rooney jets to Australia ahead of I'm A Celeb stint and reveals nod to her family - as she prepares to join the five celebs who have already landed Brooklyn Beckham reveals his tattoo tribute to Quincy Jones and says he 'misses him more than he can imagine' after the legendary producer's death aged 91 Has Leonardo DiCaprio finally found love with Vittoria Ceretti and ditched his golden rule? A look at the star's relationships as he turns 50 The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Idina Menzel and Taye Diggs' son, 15, is nearly as tall as his mother as mother-son duo attend Wicked premiere Legendary Chicago singer-songwriter Ella Jenkins dead at 100 Mariah Carey will be 'quizzed under oath' over claims estranged brother sold drugs despite star still reeling from losing mom and sister on the same day Quincy Jones is laid to rest at private family funeral in Los Angeles a week after his death at age 91 Netflix fans furious as three whole episodes of blockbuster series are uploaded with no sound in 'crippling' blunder - raging 'I thought I was going mad!' Linda Lusardi gets £3.8k non-surgical face lift and says she feels '10 years younger' - after becoming 'depressed about her jowls' James Norton reveals he has put off having children 'because it wouldn't be fair to have them right now' as he details split from fiancée Imogen Poots Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson finally addresses on set behavior controversy including 'peeing in bottles' Charli XCX leads the nominees at the Rolling Stone UK Awards with three nods as Raye and Dua Lipa are also honoured Movie director Cameron Crowe, 67, welcomes his 3rd child with publicist Anais Smith, 40 Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death tells how singer took cocaine with him Robbie Williams announces three huge UK stadium shows as part of mammoth Live 25 tour Damian Lewis slams Donald Trump by comparing him to his Wolf Hall alter-ego Henry VIII as he claims he's become 'disillusioned to the people around him' Tulisa unveils club-themed home makeover complete with huge dressing room, home gym, a bridge that leads to nowhere Gayle King fans warn her to be 'careful' after CBS host admits 'stepping out' of her comfort zone with Shaboozey Yellowstone star Cole Hauser says it would be a 'shame to stop' telling the Dutton family story Ellie Goulding shares a rare snap of son Arthur, 4, and kisses him on the cheek as they adorably dress in matching Spider-Man costumes Sunday Brunch viewers bombard show with complaints just minutes into episode - sinking claws into 'boring and unfunny' Channel 4 scenes Ben Affleck is only 'one errant remark' away from being cancelled and believes the 'phone could stop ringing' despite his success Eddie Redmayne and Úrsula Corberó put on a steamy display as husband and wife in scenes from Sky TV's The Day Of The Jackal Jamie Oliver enjoys Coldplay concert with a female friend in Sydney - after he pulled his children's book from the shelves Mike Tyson has ditched veganism, is on a sex and cannabis ban and training six hours a day to prepare to fight 27-year-old Jake Paul Your turn next? Fans go wild for adorable photo of 'auntie' Taylor Swift posing with fellow Chiefs WAG's baby 'I thought to myself, what if it had been my daughter?' Queen Camilla praises mother of woman killed by her ex - and admits she wouldn't be as 'dignified' in the same position Friends fans complain of 'plot hole' in well-known episode which still 'drives them wild' 26 years later Strictly's Nancy Xu says she is 'gutted' that she and Shayne Ward will miss out on Blackpool and that she finds it 'unfair' that he was 'criticised' Geri Horner pulls series of animated facial expressions as she wraps up warm in stylish white outfit for autumn walk Ant McPartlin looks exhausted as he works up a sweat during gruelling workout ahead of I'm A Celebrity Ali Larter, 48, came to fame for her whipped cream bikini in Varsity Blues - see her now The truth behind Ben Shephard's This Morning absence revealed as ITV star fronts new project worlds away from daytime hit James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness Lauren Pope kicks off festive season a little too early putting up her Christmas tree as she reveals she had anxiety about last year due to being a single mother Advertisement Follow DailyMail Subscribe Daily Mail Follow @dailymail Follow DailyMail Follow MailOnline Follow Daily Mail MORE DON'T MISS Radio 1 DJ Dean McCullough is the FOURTH star to arrive in Australia ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! How Sophie has become Kate's closest ally: 'Maternal' Duchess is a huge support to Princess of Wales - and it's come about because of void left by Meghan Furious Autumnwatch fans rage 'it's appalling and an insult to viewers!' as they skewer BBC for 'dumbing down' beloved nature show with complete overhaul Coleen Rooney reveals the secret to making her marriage with Wayne work as she confesses there were times she thought they wouldn't make it Emily Atack claims her party trick is 'worse than a one night stand' as she recalls the 'embarrassing' and 'horrendous' drunken night out Liam Payne larks about with close pal Rita Ora in unearthed video of them as the heartbroken singer pays tribute at the MTV EMAs Lorde shares a photo of a table littered with drugs and alcohol after celebrating her birthday Partied hard after celebrating with friends Keely Hodgkinson sparks concern as she displays her very sunburnt chest while posing in a tiny crop top during lavish holiday in Hawaii Tulisa reveals she'll QUIT showbusiness in the next two years despite wanting to relaunch solo career after I'm A Celebrity stint Major EastEnders 'Christmas spoiler REVEALED as actress accidentally leaves top secret script on train' Nightmare MTV VMAs worst dressed: Flamboyant outfits that fell flat as A-listers swarmed the red carpet in Manchester Olivia Rodrigo announced as fourth headliner for BST Hyde Park - as her support act is confirmed Kate's meaningful messages: How Princess of Wales used her outfits to pay tribute to Diana, the late Queen and her great-grandmother during Remembrance events BBC Breakfast in ANOTHER hosting shake-up as Jon Kay disappears from show without explanation The Penguin fans hail season one ending as 'the best thing DC has made' as Colin Farrell gives six-word response to calls for a second series Dancing On Ice's Vanessa Bauer says the show's new 24-hour bullying hotline is 'very necessary' ahead of its return in 2025 Viewers defend Boots' 'fabulous' Christmas advert starring Bridgerton's Adjoa Andoh after 'snowflake' critics blasted 'woke' plot Leomie Anderson ditches her gown for a VERY skimpy nude co-ord as she joins Love Island's Indiyah Polack and Maya Jama at MTV EMAs after party Shirtless Mark Wahlberg, 53, orders a trolley full of ice on room service as he continues his wacky health regime Sophie's been supportive from the start! Duchess helped an 11-year-old Princess Beatrice as she fainted on the balcony on Remembrance Sunday Listen as Katie Price performs her 2017 song I Got U at The Clapham Grand - so do you think her vocals make the cut? Strictly fans are left FUMING as they accuse Shirley Ballas of being 'biased' for sending home Shayne Ward in nail biting dance off Rita Ora breaks down in tears as she pays moving tribute to close friend Liam Payne at the MTV EMAs Emotional moment Kristina Rihanoff poses for incontinence pad campaign after she and husband Ben Cohen put their £1.75m home up for sale amid financial woes James Argent shares passionate kiss with new girlfriend Nicoline Artursson as besotted couple pack on the PDA for romantic Bonfire Night date Victoria Beckham displays incredibly toned figure as she poses for a mirror selfie - after husband David gave her new beauty product rave reviews Ice Spice flashes her abs in a cropped varsity top and low-rise pleated skirt as she steps out for dinner in Paris after performing her Y2K! World Tour Rita Ora leads the red carpet glamour in a pink feathered gown as she joins glamorous Maya Jama, Vick Hope and Raye at the MTV EMAs Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after her Australian visa was torn up - but there's a glaring problem with her new X-rated plan EXCLUSIVEKate Middleton's Remembrance Day pain: Emotional Princess of Wales appeared 'sad but regal' at Cenotaph, says body language expert Paddy McGuinness reveals he got 'choked up' over the huge support he's had for his 300 mile charity cycle challenge after feeling 'down and dejected' Rita Ora flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in ELEVEN incredible looks as she makes history as host of the MTV EMAs Raye leaves fans speechless with her vocals as she takes to the stage alongside Tyla and Shawn Mendes at the MTV EMAs Charli XCX is snubbed at MTV EMAs despite five nominations while Chappell Roan also leaves empty handed Ben Affleck looks miserable as 'spectacular' Jennifer Lopez shows him what he's missing on red carpet Sabrina Carpenter fan urinates all over the concert floor in San Francisco Ben Affleck treats his son Samuel, 12, to courtside seats at star-studded Lakers vs. Raptors game in LA Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo offer apologies for crying so much during Wicked promotion Kate wears Diana's ring in public for the first time since Christmas: Sapphire engagement ring is back after Princess opted to wear eternity bands during treatment Art Garfunkel recalls recent tearful reunion with Paul Simon after 'not seeing each other' for many years Margot Robbie shows off her midriff in a crop top less than a month after giving birth as she steps out in LA SPOILER ALERT: The real reason Yellowstone bosses sealed Kevin Costner's fate in first 30 seconds of bombshell season return Wolf Hall: The Mirror And The Light review: Cromwell's so menacing his glare could split a skull, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS MTV EMAs WINNERS FULL LIST: Taylor Swift dominates with FOUR gongs including Best Artist... while Raye and Tyla also win The White Lotus season 3 teaser shows first look at Blackpink's Lisa as hospitality host Keith Urban scrapes $600K Rolls Royce after dropping nepo baby Sunday Rose off at Billie Eilish concert Gavin Rossdale looks loved up with his Gwen Stefani lookalike girlfriend Xhoana X at MTV EMAs Happy Monday's star Bez causes CHAOS as he REFUSES to let go of the mic from Rita Ora in hilarious moment at MTV EMAs Nicola Peltz Beckham says her 'heart is shattered' in emotional tribute to Quincy Jones as she promises to look after his daughter Camila Mendes debuts bold new look as she gears up to film live-action remake of Masters Of The Universe Emmerdale's James Moore reveals future family plans after marrying partner Sophie Edwards as bride recalls their first date N-Dubz singer Tulisa Contostavlos is the third star to arrive in Brisbane ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! Coleen Rooney will NOT be reunited with Wayne after her I'm A Celeb ordeal' as football fixtures leave him grounded EXCLUSIVEColdplay frontman Chris Martin's bizarre act before boarding a plane out of Australia bound for New Zealand Who left Strictly Come Dancing? Shayne Ward's dancing journey is over after receiving the lowest results and landing in the dance-off against Wynne Evans Strictly Come Dancing RECAP as Shayne Ward is eliminated in week eight after losing dance off to Wynne Evans Nicole Kidman looks elegant in a black coat and dress as she heads out in New York City s EXCLUSIVEViewers insist star of Lidl's Christmas advert is the 'double' of Princess Charlotte - so, who is the royal lookalike? Felicity Jones cuts a chic figure in a black blazer and jeans as she addresses the audience at a screening for her new film The Brutalist Shawn Mendes dons smart suit at MTV EMAs in first red carpet appearance since addressing sexuality Zoe Saldana and Kerry Washington glow in silky tops as they lead the stars at ACLU Bill of Rights Awards Christina Ricci oozes business chic in blazer dress at book signing in LA for her new tarot deck and guidebook Fans inundate Bruce Willis's wife with messages of support after she shares 'heartbreaking' video Right behind her Pregnant Gisele Bundchen puts on a leggy display in tiny shorts as she leaves her old house in Miami Beach with a large box Bradley Cooper's unrecognizable face in snap with Gigi Hadid sparks social media confusion: 'Is that AI Bradley?' SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone femme fatale Sarah Atwood's involvement in John Dutton's brutal death is revealed in Season 5 Part 2 premiere Joker 2 star says it is the 'worst film ever made' and that he and his co-stars knew it was 'going to bomb' while filming Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright show off VERY lavish Christmas lights and decorations at £3.5m Essex mansion Georgia Toffolo stuns in a sheer gown as she celebrates 30th birthday and proposal from James Watt with personalised beer Kim Kardashian embraces on-screen mother Glenn Close as they film Ryan Murpjy's new Hulu series All's Fair Ariana Grande fans point out NSFW error on Mattel's Wicked doll packaging - as collection risks mass recall Surfing royals: How Princess Diana sparked her sons' love for the ocean after Prince Harry recently rode waves in California and Prince William surfed chilly Scottish waters Rihanna looks totally at ease as she sits in front of her own Fenty Beauty ad at a bus stop in humorous post Halsey and fiancé Avan Jogia look loved-up at Lakers vs. Raptors NBA game in LA Prince Edward remembers 'all who have made the ultimate sacrifice' as he lays Remembrance Sunday wreath Big Brother viewers SLAM show's 'totally unfair' final twist just days ahead of grand finale: 'Sack whoever came up with this idea!' ROBERT HARDMAN: Courage of the Princess of Wales on parade - in a sign of what matters MOST to the royals Big target Khloe Kardashian throws niece Dream a soccer-themed 8th birthday bash No expense spared Jedward put on a VERY animated display in matching sequinned suits as they lark about on the red carpet at the MTV EMAs Rita Ora's proud mum Vera, 60, wears a chic black suit as she supports her daughter on the MTV EMAs red carpet Halsey and new fiancé Avan Jogia look loved up while enjoying a romantic lunch in NYC Yellowstone's surprising connection to Australia... and it's not actress Jacki Weaver Amelia Gray Hamlin puts on an edgy Y2K display in low-waisted jeans and busty tank top in Milan Elon Musk slams Dana Carvey's impression of him on post-election SNL and says show's been 'dying for years' Air Bud's Kevin DiCicco says he's homeless and dealing with major health problems James Bond fans have revealed the very unlikely Aussie who should play the next 007 Interesting choice Tulisa Contostavlos 'set to use I'm A Celebrity as launchpad for new solo career' as N-Dubz singer becomes third star to arrive EXCLUSIVEShe's the seductive 60s TV actress who was called the 'feline devil' by an iconic vigilante superhero - can you guess who? Bella Hadid flashes her incredible abs in tiny bikinis in racy photo dump from her recent trip to Dubai Looking good Adam Brody and Kristen Bell show off undeniable chemistry as they support Netflix's Nobody Wants This in LA Sam Thompson says he 'might get another bridge reunion' with Pete Wicks if he gets the axe from Strictly Come Dancing Kim Kardashian sports edgy black trench coat as she visits skin care clinic in Beverly Hills Jodie Turner-Smith sets pulses racing as she swaps her regal red carpet gown for skintight black PVC dress at the MTV EMAs Jada Pinkett Smith sparks health concern following rare date night with husband Will Smith The future's orange! Lorraine Kelly takes her adorable granddaughter to her first Dundee United game Proud granny Make breakfast TV great again! Eammon Holmes looks unrecognisable as he transforms into perma-tanned Donald Trump What Kate said to Sophie: Lip reader reveals conversation between Princess of Wales and Duchess of Edinburgh at Cenotaph Katherine Ryan, 41, puts on a busty display as she makes rare red carpet appearance with daughter Violet, 15, at the MTV EMAs Maya Jama channels Elizabeth Hurley as she slips into THAT career-making Versace safety pin gown to attend the MTV European Music Awards Lioness Chloe Kelly looks incredible in a cropped bandeau top and thigh-high boots on the red carpet at MTV EMAS What Taylor Swift told security guard: Pop star's cutting remark to her entourage during wild arrival to watch Travis Kelce Rita Ora shares a red carpet kiss with husband Taika Waititi ahead of her history-making THIRD hosting gig at the MTV EMAs Mariah Carey and son Moroccan dress up as Alvin and the Chipmunks for Halloween in rare family snap Venom 3 stays strong at the box office for third week in a row but new holiday film emerges to challenge it Gemma Atkinson turns heads in a busty leather dress as she poses on the MTV European Music Awards red carpet Travis Kelce sends girlfriend Taylor Swift wild as breaks Kansas City Chiefs history with another touchdown Jodie Turner-Smith puts on a show-stopping display in royal blue gown with a train and fascinator at the 2024 MTV EMAs SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone fans furious over fate of Kevin Costner's John Dutton in Season 5 part two premiere Jeremy Clarkson WILL join protesting farmers at rally in Westminster this week after fears of 'police ban' Pregnant Charlotte Crosby shows off her baby bump alongside fiancé Jake Ankers at MTV EMAs in Manchester Mabel, 28, rocks a quirky checked dress as she joins her chic mum Neneh Cherry, 60, at the MTV European Music Awards Brooklyn Beckham goes for a spin in his classic Mustang in Los Angeles after adding another car to his impressive collection Emily Ratajkowski flashes leg in glam red coat as she walks her dog in New York City She looked super chic as she stepped out Vick Hope puts on a VERY leggy display in a racy thigh-high split skirt and sculpted bodice at the star-studded MTV EMAs James Norton admits split from ex-fiancée Imogen Poots was not his decision as he reveals heartbreaking reason they broke up Katie McGlynn puts on a VERY leggy display in a skimpy silver mini dress as she joins busty Liberty Poole at the MTV EMAs Aaron Taylor-Johnson cuts a debonair figure in a burgundy suit as he graces the red carpet at 2024 MTV EMAs Holly Hagan puts on a VERY busty display in a plunging gown as she cosies up to pregnant co-star Charlotte Crosby at MTV EMAs Tony Hinchcliffe breaks his silence on Trump election win after calling Puerto Rico a 'floating island of garbage' How to watch Yellowstone Season 5 Part 2 premiere in Australia as show begins new frontier without Kevin Costner . Brianna Chickenfry reveals why she won't get Zach Bryan lyric tattoo removed amid ugly split Interview Britney Spears claims was censored in 2016 is finally published Discussing her conservatorship EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb welcomes its first arrival! McFly star Danny Jones touches down at Brisbane Airport Taylor Swift's entourage get into heated altercation as she arrives to watch Travis Kelce and Chiefs Drama Leomie Anderson flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in a VERY skimpy tasselled gown as she poses up a storm on the MTV EMAs red carpet Netflix fans gripped by 'best show they've ever watched' - raving that crime thriller 'had them hooked just a few minutes in' EXCLUSIVEKelly Brook and her husband Jeremy Parisi land major ITV show deal after winning over viewers on BBC's Race Across the World Mel B shares a glimpse of her VERY organised shoe collection - after branding fellow Spice Girls 'd***heads' Raye puts on a very animated display as she stuns in a quirky bejewelled gown ahead of her performance at the MTV EMA's Pamela Anderson's secrets to embracing her natural beauty at 57: From sunrise walks to her no makeup rule and the one thing she avoids 'at all costs' Georgia Kousoulou shows off her bump in skintight dress as she celebrates her daughter's birth with 'dream baby shower' Gigi Hadid and Bradley Cooper enjoy date night as they watch Alyssa Milano performing on Broadway Molly Marsh dazzles as she shows off her enviable figure in sparkly burgundy dress at the MTV European Music Awards Katie Price jumps on stage during London drag competition and belts out her 2017 track I Got U - as she reignites celebrity feud Coleen Rooney suffers major blow ahead of I'm A Celebrity appearance as the first stars touch down in Australia EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb's Sam Thompson reveals he made emotional phone call to best pal Pete Wicks during thunderstorm-hit flight to Australia Chappell Roan 'parts ways' with her management team amid skyrocketing career Split Susan Sarandon admits she'll never work in Hollywood again and reflects on being dropped by her agent after Palestine remarks Pregnant Lottie Tomlinson cradles her bump in a stunning white dress as she celebrates her baby shower with twin sisters Phoebe and Daisy Noel Gallagher is 'working on a new album' with 'six tracks already in the bag' - but brother Liam is yet to contribute I was on The Undateables - the amount we actually got paid and how long it took to film a single date left me completely stunned . The Duchess of Edinburgh, 59, stepped into 'maternal' role at Cenotaph to help 'stoic' Kate Middleton - offering a supportive touch, says body language expert Leonardo DiCaprio ditches the models to party with his peers as he celebrates 50th birthday with Brad Pitt, 60, Paris Hilton, 43, Katy Perry, 40 and his long-time buddies Emmerdale's James Moore ties the knot with partner Sophie Edwards in emotional lakeside ceremony as bride reveals the soap star's heartfelt speech Kaia Gerber oozes glamour in Marc Jacobs gowns and opens up about her intellect being underestimated as she graces Vogue's December cover VERY dramatic exits! From Olivia Rodrigo disappearing through a hole to Gemma Collins' viral mishap - on-stage tumbles that will make you wince English acting legend is approached to be face of Marks & Spencer as bosses keen to sign 'chic, high calibre and sophisticated' star to evolve brand GMA host looks just like his famous father as he shares romantic proposal photos Will Reeve has made a made a big step in his life EXCLUSIVEZara McDermott will NOT be joining boyfriend Sam Thompson in Australia as he films I'm A Celebrity spin-off show Today's headlines Most Read Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC... Putin was so close to launching a nuke in Ukraine that Britain was preparing for the fallout... as... One of the founders of world's oldest Breastfeeding support charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of... The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS... Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more... The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make... Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said... How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving... RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be... Teenagers in Jewish youth football team 'attacked by knife-wielding pro-Palestine mob in Berlin' as violence... Two mothers who 'refused to quarantine' in hotels after claiming they flew to Dubai and got boob jobs could... The Skegness property gold rush: It's rated the world's worst holiday resort, but 'Skeggy' is now creating a... Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having... Strongman filmed lifting a Ford Transit van and pulled tractor with his bare hands while claiming car crash... Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new... Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales World's oldest joke shop which supplied fake moustaches, magic wands and whoopee cushions to generations of... Middle class misery SPREADS! After pan-demonium over Le Creuset sale, now Britain is running out of... Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty.... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change -... BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his... More than 16,000 people object to 'outrageous' plans for Norfolk 'mega-farm' housing 870,000 chickens and... Busta Rhymes praises 'superstar' Benny Hill as US rapper reveals himself as a VERY unlikely fan of the saucy... Even the nepo babies are flocking to Australia! Celeb offspring join the exodus of Brits who prefer life... Parents' fury after school tries to 'ban' Christmas references from its festive pantomime so it can be... Phil Foden's party-loving mother blasted by neighbours for 'deafening Disneyland two-hour fireworks display'... Why Cadbury's Chocolate Fingers are changing hands in France for more than TWENTY times their retail price Christmas pudding is no longer important for the festive dinner table, poll reveals Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump Scientist reverses her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of... Madonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris Woman in her 30s killed in Manchester house fire: Probe launched into inferno that 'young children were... Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant slams current popular music as 'narcissistic and processed' as he throws... I'm A Celebrity's 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in... Bishop of Newcastle joins chorus of voices calling for Archbishop Justin Welby to quit after 'ignoring'... I'm a survivor of child abuser John Smyth... Archbishop Justin Welby put his reputation above victims and... I went to the Le Creuset sale and it was HELL, it was absolute chaos and organisers completely... Rachel Reeves' National Insurance hike could force most nurseries to raise fees for parents, shocking survey... Families on former council estate facing £66,000 bill so Labour can hit net zero heating targets brand... Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending bizarre letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he... EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Fury in Sweden at video of Syrian asylum seeker pushing a 91-year-old widow down stairs before violently... The lead up to Gary Lineker 'quitting Match of the Day' follows a long history of Twitter own goals and... Ryanair flight forced to make emergency landing at Stansted Airport after passenger dies onboard How Narinder Kaur went from Big Brother fame to outspoken TV panellist: From slating the royals to legal row... More than 3,000 privately-educated pupils applied to join state schools between June and September as... MORE HEADLINES Kate Middleton supporters slam TV presenter for 'disgusting' remark about Princess of Wales' appearance as she returns to royal duties after cancer treatment Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time and shares unseen photo: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death discloses new details about singer's last days and insists he did nothing wrong Fury in Sweden at video of Syrian asylum seeker pushing a 91-year-old widow down stairs before violently mugging her as she visits husband's grave The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Family of pharmacy student, 21, who killed herself after being wrongly told she had failed an exam hit out at university after 'totally unnecessary tragedy' Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' PAN-demonium! Le Creuset sale sparks four-hour queue and police operation as hundreds of shoppers descend on warehouse to bag high-end luxury pot at cut price 'I have no regrets': Defiant council worker who was sacked for 'AdultHumanMale' instead of he/him tells how he's been forced to use his retirement savings to pay legal bill More than 3,000 privately-educated pupils applied to join state schools between June and September as Labour's VAT tax raid forces parents to pay extra £2,000 on fees Jill Biden gives Kamala Harris the cold shoulder after husband Joe was forced out of race the VP lost to Trump Mother is torn apart by pack of wild dogs on her walk to work after making desperate last phone call begging for help Moment 'six-foot black cat stalks through UK field hunting prey' as locals reveal fears a 'panther' is on the loose BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Christine after their break-up Artisan potter wins bitter £300k four-year battle with painter neighbour over ownership of 4ft-wide stream dividing their gardens Trump border czar Tom Homan has a blunt message for his critics as he defends his mass deportation plan Football's shame as Remembrance Sunday silence is scrapped after nine seconds when Celtic football fans chant pro-IRA songs through it Why IS Starmer attending COP29 summit? PM faces demands for UK to pay into $1TRILLION climate fund as he heads to Azerbaijan despite leaders from US, Germany, EU, China and India staying away One of the founders of world's oldest Breastfeeding support charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - and says organisation has 'become a travesty of my original intent' Woman loses £20,000 in fake TV licensing scam after conman fooled her into using WhatsApp screen sharing so he could see what was on her phone Donald Trump Jr suggests his President-elect father will cut off aid to Ukraine with meme telling Zelensky 'you're 38 days from losing your allowance' Keir Starmer and Emmanuel Macron's crisis summit on how to deal with Trump: PM and French leader plan for US trade war, the end of Pentagon defence handouts and Ukraine peace deal Primary school teacher, 57, took fatal overdose after being urged to 'find a new hobby' by her GP to battle her depression, inquest hears Trump announces his new 'border czar' Tom Homan to lead the biggest mass deportation in U.S. history Mother, 54, who bled to death during botched gastric stomach operation in Turkey had turned to surgery because she could not buy another course of Ozempic, inquest hears How undercover cops posing as lorry drivers pulled off Britain's biggest drugs bust EVER after finding two tonnes of cocaine worth £186m hidden in cargo of bananas from Colombia Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after Australian authorities tore up her visa Pictured: Schoolgirl, 12, who tragically died after being hit by falling tree branch as devastated family pay tribute to 'shining light' Justin Welby 'has lost confidence of the clergy': Archbishop of Canterbury facing mounting pressure to quit for 'ignoring' sex abuse by Church of England's most prolific abuser Moment girl wearing headphones is run over by a train while crossing tracks - and somehow survives with minor injuries School Head of English wants Shakespeare axed for GCSEs because it 'sends pupils and teachers to sleep' and TikTok and Instagram posts studied instead MOST READ IN DETAIL Advertisement NEW ARTICLESHomeTop Share Back to top Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Sitemap Archive Video Archive Authors Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Money Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group dmg media Contact us How to complain Leadership Team Advertise with us Contributors Terms Subscription Terms & Conditions Do not sell or share my personal information About MailOnline Privacy Settings Privacy policy & cookies Advertisement AdvertisementSunshine Coast schoolgirl was released from hospital a day before she died of the flu | Daily Mail Online Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Best Buys Discounts Black Friday My Profile Logout Login Breaking News Australia Video University Guide China Debate Meghan Markle Prince Harry King Charles III Weather Most read My Profile Logout Login Privacy Policy Feedback Tuesday, Nov 12th 2024 12PM 17°C 3PM 17°C 5-Day Forecast Advertisement Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the flagship show: Former England ace Alex Scott among the front-runners… and there are some VERY leftfield options Revealed - Putin 'was so close to launching a nuke in Ukraine that British officials started preparing for the UK to be hit by the deadly fallout': Shock news comes as Russia 'plans to up drone attacks in coming days following US election' Founder of world's oldest breastfeeding charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - saying it has become 'a travesty' that 'indulges the fantasies of adults' The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS asks... why did no one in authority tell the police about the abuse by top barrister who exchanged Christmas cards with Justin Welby for years? Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more serious condition which affects up to two in three women The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make a difference, these are the ones that do Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said it was just $250,000 in cash. I'm STUNNED it was actually £15m of cocaine - it's so unfair I face 60 years in US jail, says Brit beautician How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving one of the world's biggest killers can actually have a protective effect RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be mad Teenagers in Jewish youth football team 'attacked by knife-wielding pro-Palestine mob in Berlin' as violence breaks out in Amsterdam amid 'Jew hunt' Two mothers who 'refused to quarantine' in hotels after flying to Dubai to get boob jobs face prison sentence after losing Irish court battle against Covid pandemic policy The Skegness property gold rush: It's rated the world's worst holiday resort, but 'Skeggy' is now creating a new seaside millionaires' row to rival Sandbanks Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having intimate meal with family Yorkshire's Strongest Man contestant was filmed lifting a Ford Transit van with his bare hands while claiming a car crash had left him unable to carry shopping bags in 'blatantly dishonest' insurance claim Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new Assisted dying bill Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales World's oldest joke shop which supplied fake moustaches, magic wands and whoopee cushions to generations of youngsters is forced to close after 138 years in business Middle class misery SPREADS! After pan-demonium over Le Creuset sale, now Britain is running out of taramasalata! Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change - as he arrives in Azerbaijan for COP29 climate summit Previous Next Little Emma, 11, who died from the flu was released from hospital just one day earlier - as cases surge across AustraliaEmma Schwab, 11, died July 6 after contracting Influenza BShe was released from hospital a day earlier By BRETT LACKEY FOR DAILY MAIL AUSTRALIA Published: 16:36 GMT, 12 July 2023 | Updated: 12:19 GMT, 13 July 2023 e-mail 305 shares 1 View comments A primary school student who died after catching the flu was so unwell she was taken to the emergency department a day earlier but was discharged. Emma Schwab, 11, was treated for Influenza B at Noosa Hospital on Queensland's Sunshine Coast on July 5 but returned home.Her condition then worsened to the point paramedics were called the following day, reports The Courier Mail.Multiple ambulance crews, including critical care paramedics, attended the home and rushed her to Gold Coast University Hospital where she sadly died on July 6. A Gold Coast University Hospital spokesperson would not comment on specifics but said it was 'heartbreaking' and that trained personnel were supporting Emma's devastated parents Cameron and Javiera Schwab. Noosa Hospital is run by Ramsay Health Care with a spokesperson telling the newspaper they have reached out to the family.'We express our deepest condolences to the patient's family and loved ones; we have been in contact with the family to offer our support during this extremely difficult time.' Emma Schwab (pictured), 11, from Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast, died last Thursday after contracting Influenza B Emma pictured with her mum Javiera was released from hospital and went homeAustralia is experiencing a spike in flu cases this season, with the highest number among children.From January 1 to June 25, there have been 116,473 flu notifications reported to the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) in Australia, the Health Department said.'Since seasonal surveillance commenced in April 2023, there have been 1,236 sentinel hospital admissions with influenza, of which 80 people or 6.5 per cent were admitted directly to ICU.''In the year-to-date, notification rates have been highest in people aged 05–09 years, followed by those aged 0–04 years, and 10–14 years.'In NSW alone, those aged 16 and under represent 54 per cent of all emergency department admissions for influenza-like illness over the last week, with NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant labelling the spike 'concerning'.'In recent weeks we have seen influenza cases rising fastest among very young children as well as those aged five to 16 years, with these two age groups often accounting for around half of all flu cases diagnosed in NSW each week,' said Dr Chant.'Sadly, our children's hospitals are seeing an increasing number of these children being admitted for care and some of these patients are seriously unwell.Dr Chant urged parents to get their children vaccinated against flu to reduce the risk of them being hospitalised. NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant has urged parents to get their children vaccinated against fluSince May, 16 children have been admitted to intensive care in NSW with life-threatening complications from influenza at Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and John Hunter Hospital. Doctors say these can include serious heart, brain, and muscle-related complications. A GoFundMe page, set up by a friend of Emma Schwab's parents to cover her funeral costs, has raised almost $9,000. 'Emma tragically passed away on Thursday from Influenza B,' wrote the GoFundMe organiser Mel Horton. 'She was only 11 years old. Understandably the family is torn apart.'Emma's death comes after a teenage girl from the Central Coast also died after contracting Influenza B. A teenage girl from the Central Coast also died after contracting Influenza. The Year 9 student attended St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford (pictured) and passed away on the weekend after falling ill with the disease several weeks agoThe Year 9 student attended St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford and passed away on the weekend after falling ill with the disease several weeks ago. Parents with children at the school received a letter informing them of the girl's tragic death, according to the ABC. '(She) was a well-loved student, thoughtful to the needs of others, a true friend and a valued member of our college community,' the letter read. Gold CoastFluQueensland Share or comment on this article: Sunshine Coast schoolgirl was released from hospital a day before she died of the flu e-mail 305 shares Most watched News videos Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach 91-year-old woman pushed down subway stairs by 'immigrant' robber Princess Kate observes Remembrance Sunday parade at Whitehall Jill Biden sits next to Kamala Harris at Arlington National Cemetery 2019: Tom Homan takes on AOC in heated exchange Narinder Kaur apologises for 'stupid' tweet about Kate Oh Joe! Moment Biden battles way through sand on Delaware beach Moment Donald Trump snubs Ivanka for Elon in family portrait CCTV captures final moments before woman is mauled to death Joe Biden appears to wipe away tears at Arlington National Cemetery Shocking moment girl wearing headphones is hit and run over by train Moment King Charles lay a wreath and salutes on Remembrance Sunday Comments 1 Share what you think Newest Oldest Best rated Worst rated View all The comments below have been moderated in advance. View all The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline. We are no longer accepting comments on this article. Bing Site Web Enter search term: Search DON'T MISS Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC looks to reboot the show Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump She's expecting I'm A Celeb's Coleen Rooney reveals vast list of instructions to look after her four children on two HUGE boards during her jungle stint EXCLUSIVECher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty. 'Do you want to come to my place?' he asked. I was 15... Britney Spears reunites with son Jayden, 18, after years of estrangement and move to Hawaii Reestablishing their bond Laundry legend or sock-shrinking disaster? Share this quiz with your loved ones so they can identify their bad household habits - and change them for good! Ad Feature Liam Payne's $9,500-a-month mansion he moved into with girlfriend Kate Cassidy weeks before his death is back on the rental market Kate's chic tweaks to refashion old looks: From velvet bows to hemlines and even a sari, how she makes recycled look fresh Maura Higgins enjoys final date night with new flame Pete Wicks before she heads to Australia for I'm A Celeb as a latecomer EXCLUSIVESuper soft hair in three easy steps: Simple routine provides up to 7x* more moisture for up to 72 hours** Ad Feature Iron Maiden star Paul Di'Anno's cause of death revealed after married father-of-six heavy metal singer passed away aged 66 EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Bizarre Alec Baldwin and wife Hilaria bring six of their children to the Spellbound premiere in New York City Family posed on the red carpet Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having a meal with family Find your inner glow: We asked one beauty writer to trial a new range of gentle skincare - here's how she got on Ad Feature EXCLUSIVEAerial photos show Leonardo DiCaprio's stunning eco-friendly compound is completed just in time for his 50th birthday Busta Rhymes praises 'superstar' Benny Hill as US rapper reveals he's a VERY unlikely fan of the saucy British comedian - after discovering him during childhood holidays in Morecambe Ralph Fiennes looks unrecognizable as he reunites with his The English Patient co-star Juliette Binoche for upcoming epic The Return I'm A Celebrity 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in first look snaps How understanding your glucose levels can help you feel less tired after meals Ad Feature Even the nepo babies are flocking to Australia! Celeb offspring join the exodus of Brits who prefer life Down Under EXCLUSIVETHE DUCHESS OF YORK: I'm on a mission to rid nappies of plastic - with my fifth grandchild on the way EXCLUSIVEPhil Foden's party-loving mother blasted by neighbours for 'deafening Disneyland two-hour fireworks display' Only Fools And Horses star Sir David Jason, 84, reveals he struggles to get parts because of his age Difficulties Looking to refresh your space before winter? Transform your home and interiors with these 10 top must-know brands Ad Feature Her Majesty The Queen: Behind Closed Doors review: Camilla's personality shone, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS Gary Lineker 'will QUIT Match of the Day at the end of the season' after 26 years presenting the show EXCLUSIVEMelvin Odoom is the SEVENTH star to land in Brisbane ahead of I'm A Celeb - as jungle-bound DJ shares first impression of Australian weather Nicolas Cage looks mysterious while dressed in character as he shoots upcoming Spider-Noir series on location in Los Angeles Damaged hair? Don't despair! With 1 billion bonds packed in every bottle, the NEW bond-building wonder product is here to help Ad Feature Coleen Nolan's son Jake Roche, 32, reveals he's going to be a dad in days as singer is forced to reschedule upcoming shows Chris Pratt and wife Katherine Schwarzenegger welcome their third child together and name has nod to JFK Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant slams current popular music as 'narcissistic and processed' as he throws shade at Oasis Coleen Rooney wears £1,060 silk pyjamas to jet out of UK airport for I'm A Celeb as she makes the most of luxury items Riviera glamour, Ibiza nightlife and the most stylish ships at sea: Why THIS is the ultimate cruise for your adults-only Mediterranean escape Ad Feature Aussie actress slams Rebel Wilson's 'absurd' claims she was sexually harassed by a producer on set of new film The Deb Popular British comedian and TV star shocks fans as he announces he's quitting Twitter for good Stepping back Kyle Richards 'terrified' to discuss 'evolving sexuality' with her kids amid Morgan Wade romance rumors Khloe Kardashian shows off her 27inch waistline in see-through nude lingerie as she announces new brand Trim physique Struggling to maintain your weight during menopause? You're not alone - here's why this happens and what you can do about it Ad Feature Inside Keith Urban's incredible $6.5m luxury car collection as his wife Nicole Kidman reveals the vehicle she likes to drive Austin Barnes and Matt Smith are surrounded by New York Mets fans on Caught Stealing set Channing Tatum enjoys a romantic stroll with co-star Kirsten Dunst on set of their upcoming film Roofman Benny Blanco sparks internet frenzy as he makes Sexiest Man Alive list amid Selena Gomez romance: 'He's redefining sexy!' BUSTED! The career-myths that are holding you back from success Advertising Megan Fox fans notice very specific astrological detail about her pregnancy announcement post with MGK EPHRAIM HARDCASTLE: Why did the late Queen miss out on a Nobel Peace Prize for transforming the Commonwealth? Bad Sisters star Sharon Horgan says she is glad the show made women feel like they weren't 'f***ing crazy' EXCLUSIVEMariah Carey's 5.5 inch custom sandals were designed to dazzle with over 10,000 hand-applied crystals EXCLUSIVEGive the gift of curiosity! Discover why the What on Earth! Magazine is the ultimate Christmas present for kids who love learning (and we have an offer) SHOPPING Nicole Scherzinger pictured wearing Kamala Harris shirt before 'coming out as a Trump supporter' Awkward MAFS UK's Polly Sellman and Adam Nightingale 'SPLIT' after explosive row as groom is branded a 'f*****g narcissist' Machine Gun Kelly's turbulent dating history laid bare as he prepares to welcome first child with Megan Fox Checkered past Bradley Cooper looks loved-up with Gigi Hadid in NYC after sparking shock with 'unrecognizable' face Smitten Who left the Big Brother house? Baked Potato is brutally sent home through the back door just days ahead of final Happy Monday's star Bez rocked out 'until 4am' after the MTV EMAs and 'showed Maya Jama how to party' Queen Camilla appears emotional as she speaks to domestic violence survivor in new documentary Powerful topic Keke Palmer claims costar made a racist remark to her on Ryan Murphy's Scream Queens series Allegations Coleen Rooney insists small food portions won't bother her on I'm A Celeb as she often 'misses a meal' and 'never gets hangry' Sting says Diddy allegations don't 'taint' Every Breath You Take - after disgraced rapper sampled song Nonplussed Kristin Chenoweth addresses Sean 'Diddy' Combs sex trafficking allegations with unusual response Rapper is under arrest The inventive way Megan Fox hid her baby bump at Halloween bash before pregnancy reveal with MGK Secret Yellowstone stars 'still processing' popular show's devastating ending - after bombshell season return Jane Moore shares the poignant reason she finally decided to say yes to I'm A Celebrity - and reveals her TWO big phobias The REAL reason Chris Martin kisses the tarmac before he flies after Coldplay frontman was seen planting his lips to the ground Leonardo DiCaprio rings in 50th birthday with Vittoria Ceretti, 26, at second star-studded dinner party Night out Loose Women icon 'set to reprise legendary role in Waterloo Road' as she returns to her soap roots Returning to the show Cast of iconic kids' TV show send fans wild with 'nostalgia overload' as they reunite 25 years after first episode Legendary Jeopardy! host Ken Jennings reveals major show update in off-camera admission He made an off-camera admission David Duchovny reveals 'failure of friendship' with The X-Files co-star Gillian Anderson amid tension on hit show Queen Camilla praised for 'moving' and 'powerful' ITV documentary on domestic abuse Positive response Legendary rocker hits back at John Farnham claim their former manager 'drugged me for years' Not happy EXCLUSIVEBrian Austin Green's surprising reaction to ex-wife Megan Fox's pregnancy with Machine Gun Kelly Unexpected Leggy Millie Mackintosh stuns in a black chic minidress as she joins husband Hugo Taylor at book launch As stylish as always Line Of Duty star Adrian Dunbar 'CONFIRMS' show's return: 'When they announce it, it's going to burn up the internet!' EXCLUSIVEWhat's really going with Euphoria? Cancelation rumors spark after Zendaya is cast in Christopher Nolan film Megan Fox and Machine Gun Kelly's ROLLERCOASTER romance timeline: From pregnancy to drinking each other's blood LL Cool J 'chased Monty Don to ask for a selfie as rapper reveals himself to be a VERY unlikely fan of the BBC horticulturist' GK Barry spills the beans on Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly's awkward Instagram gaffe - as she prepares for I'm A Celeb Cat Deeley is criticised by viewers after unfortunate gaffe during Remembrance Day segment on This Morning I'm A Celebrity's Tulisa admits she 'doesn't want to draw attention' in jungle by recreating Myleene Klass' bikini moment EXCLUSIVEThe real reason Ben Affleck always looks 'miserable' The actor always manages to look downcast Emily Watson catches the eye in a graphic gown as she joins chic co-star Olivia Williams at VIP screening of DUNE: Prophecy Megan Fox and MGK fans react to pregnancy reveal eight months after pair ENDED engagement Delighted How England Lioness Chloe Kelly went from goofy teen to glamorous red carpet regular - and the £350 beauty treatment she swears by Travis Kelce and Taylor Swift joined by surprise sports superstar in Chiefs VIP suite as new images emerge EXCLUSIVEColeen Rooney to be greeted by her four sons on the I'm A Celebrity bridge after husband Wayne is forced to stay behind Jessica Simpson hints Eric Johnson marriage is OVER as she admits she 'put up' with things she 'did not deserve' Lizzie Cundy, 56, puts on a leggy display as she follows in Jennifer Lopez's footsteps and undergoes a HydraFacial EXCLUSIVEBBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he change Tube's 5G advertising Luann de Lesseps, 59, reveals which A-List actor she made out with and how she is a member of the Mile High Club I'm A Celeb star Oti Mabuse reveals she is taking part on the gruelling ITV show to 'catch up on sleep' after giving birth to her first child last year Timothee Chalamet reveals the feature he was told would prevent him from succeeding in Hollywood Huge star The View panel fiercely defend Nicole Scherzinger over Russell Brand's election hat Speaking out Queen Silvia of Sweden stuns in deep purple ensemble as she joins King Carl XVI Gustaf for award ceremony in Stockholm Coleen Rooney gives a subtle nod to her Wagatha Christie trial against Rebekah Vardy as she prepares for I'm A Celebrity Strictly sends viewers wild as it reveals comedian ie FIRST confirmed for festive special as he jokes he's about to 'ruin Christmas' EXCLUSIVEColeen's one last night with Wayne! Rooney insisted on taking the last possible flight to Australia ahead of her I'm A Celeb stint Travis Kelce's ex Kayla Nicole makes wild accusation against Taylor Swift Nicole dated Kelce on and off for five years before his romance with Swift James McAvoy is seen for the first time on the Glasgow set of his new film California Schemin' about hoax rappers Silibil N' Brains EXCLUSIVEMadonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris It looks like Madonna is no longer crazy for her recent toyboy Demi Moore, 62, shows off her bikini body as she wishes 2lb dog Pilaf a happy birthday Kevin Costner breaks silence on Yellowstone's John Dutton being killed off in Season 5 part two premiere Cash-strapped Diddy is renting out his private jet for $432k-a-flight as sex trial looms Troubled rapper is trying to generate cash Benny Blanco dishes on VERY romantic mornings with Selena Gomez as he makes People's Sexiest Man Alive issue Katy Perry brutally trolled after sharing her pick for the year's best film Got more than she bargained for Prince Harry pens heartfelt message of 'admiration and appreciation' for his 'fellow veterans' on Remembrance Day Charles grins as he welcomes King of Bahrain to Windsor Castle with a warm hug Charles is hosting Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa As Philip Schofield lays his 'extraordinary loyal' mother Pat to rest, friends tell how she became his rock after his TV downfall, reveals KATIE HIND BBC drops first trailer for Return to Paradise and finally confirms release date for Death in Paradise spin-off series Coming soon The Wheel fans blast mortified Helen Flanagan for getting 'very simple' question wrong - but do you know the answer? Dexys Midnight Runners original member dead: Andy Leek passes away aged 66 following long battle with Parkinson's disease just days after tying the knot Shirtless Romeo Beckham shows off his ripped physique as he enjoys getaway with pals - after confirming romance with Gray Sorrenti Cher: The night I took a drunken John Lennon to the Playboy mansion - and he stripped stark naked in front of me in the infamous secret Grotto Barry McGuigan is the SIXTH star to touch down in Australia ahead of his I'm A Celeb stint and jokes he's 'there to sign his next big fighter' Ex Big Brother star Narinder Kaur faces furious backlash for saying Kate Middleton has 'aged so much' as princess returns to royal duties Gary Barlow is dwarfed by best friend musician Eliot Kennedy as the pair share a boozy bath on the Take That star's wine tour series Eamonn Holmes takes shocking swipe at GB News co-star's appearance as sexism debate takes personal turn - and she warns 'back off!' Laverne Cox breaks silence on whether she'll leave US after Trump's election win Opened up about the possibility of leaving Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker transform into Morticia and Gomez Addams for new Halloween posts Getting into character Damian Lewis is criticised for his conduct during Wolf Hall interview after he confessed the role has 'worn him down' Mission Impossible 8 FIRST LOOK: Tom Cruise's Ethan Hunt dangles from a glider in trailer as title for long-delayed conclusion is finally revealed Cruz Beckham, 19, and girlfriend Jackie Apostel, 29, enjoy another public display of affection as they share a passionate kiss Netflix fans rave over 'gripping' crime thriller based on true story 'full of twists and turns' - praising 'excellent acting and an unpredictable ending' Gladiator II review: This sequel falls short of its masterpiece predecessor but is still heaps of farfetched and ferocious fun Deal Or No Deal fans blast ITV bosses for 'killing' the show with big change to Stephen Mulhern's reboot Not happy Chappell Roan has shock four word response to report about her split from management Speaking out EXCLUSIVEPregnant Charlotte Dawson details how she's learning to forgive fiancé Matthew Sarsfield's sexting scandal as she insists that it would have been 'easier to walk away' Kristin Cavallari's ex Mark Estes 'proposes' to Love Island star after hanging out with former girlfriend Marriage plans Chris Evans continues to wow with bookish new look as he promotes Red One in NYC Looking good Yellowstone fans confused after Kevin Costner appears in credits for season five part two despite departure Melissa Suffield jiggles around in a pink bikini as she hits back at cruel trolls and urges to acknowledge the 'reality of everyday bodies' Kyle Richards gives BFF Teddi Mellencamp divorce advice amid Edwin Arroyave split At different stages in their divorces Paul Mescal reveals his 'heartbeat is going through the f***ing roof' as he arrives at the Gladiator II premiere in his hometown Dublin with his family Jennifer Meyer, 47, flashes her $500K diamond engagement ring from billionaire Geoffrey Ogunlesi, 33 Pricey Moment Laurence Fox rescued his fiancee's dog Rocky after pet Jack Russell got trapped in hole underground EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celebrity contestants are set to be battered by freak storms and torrential rain as bad weather threatens to 'ruin' the series Katie Price appears to reignite bitter feud with Emily Atack as she makes snide 'fishy' dig AGAIN in front of huge audience at The Clapham Grand The Day Of The Jackal star Ursula Corbero star sends fans wild with her racy social media snaps after revealing she was 'confused' by her 'weak' role Livid Loose Women fans urge James Martin to 'move with the times' after 'daft, money-wasting' cooking confession on ITV show Moment country star SCREAMS as she falls and takes out her guitarist mid-show Performing in Helotes, Texas on Friday Diana Vickers sets pulses racing in a skimpy gold bikini as she soaks up the sun on lavish Ibiza getaway Sofia Richie is 17 years YOUNGER than sister Nicole Richie but they look the same age in rare photo Raye and LL Cool J look all partied out as they leave Manchester after MTV EMAs - where the British singer was named Best UK & Ireland artist Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright enjoy Majorca getaway with Olly Murs after admitting they're in the 'boring phase of their relationship' Taylor Swift fans furious over savage Jeopardy! clue about Travis Kelce On the program's official Instagram account Iskra Lawrence is praised for sharing footage of her homebirth after welcoming baby daughter 'P. P' Wolf Hall leaves viewers 'traumatised' with 'brutal' execution scene just minutes into BBC premiere as they beg 'please don't show that again!' Rebekah Vardy sets tongues wagging as she packs for mystery trip abroad and posts a teasing emoji - as nemesis WAG Coleen Rooney jets off to Australia for I'm A Celeb Antiques Roadshow guest gasps 'I could cry!' as he learns staggering value of sculpture he bought for just £50 and was using as a DOORSTOP How Alison Hammond's turbulent love life influenced her debut novel, from cheating scandals to surprise encounters at a massage parlour Coleen Rooney jets to Australia ahead of I'm A Celeb stint and reveals nod to her family - as she prepares to join the five celebs who have already landed Brooklyn Beckham reveals his tattoo tribute to Quincy Jones and says he 'misses him more than he can imagine' after the legendary producer's death aged 91 Has Leonardo DiCaprio finally found love with Vittoria Ceretti and ditched his golden rule? A look at the star's relationships as he turns 50 The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Idina Menzel and Taye Diggs' son, 15, is nearly as tall as his mother as mother-son duo attend Wicked premiere Legendary Chicago singer-songwriter Ella Jenkins dead at 100 Mariah Carey will be 'quizzed under oath' over claims estranged brother sold drugs despite star still reeling from losing mom and sister on the same day Quincy Jones is laid to rest at private family funeral in Los Angeles a week after his death at age 91 Netflix fans furious as three whole episodes of blockbuster series are uploaded with no sound in 'crippling' blunder - raging 'I thought I was going mad!' Linda Lusardi gets £3.8k non-surgical face lift and says she feels '10 years younger' - after becoming 'depressed about her jowls' James Norton reveals he has put off having children 'because it wouldn't be fair to have them right now' as he details split from fiancée Imogen Poots Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson finally addresses on set behavior controversy including 'peeing in bottles' Charli XCX leads the nominees at the Rolling Stone UK Awards with three nods as Raye and Dua Lipa are also honoured Movie director Cameron Crowe, 67, welcomes his 3rd child with publicist Anais Smith, 40 Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death tells how singer took cocaine with him Robbie Williams announces three huge UK stadium shows as part of mammoth Live 25 tour Damian Lewis slams Donald Trump by comparing him to his Wolf Hall alter-ego Henry VIII as he claims he's become 'disillusioned to the people around him' Tulisa unveils club-themed home makeover complete with huge dressing room, home gym, a bridge that leads to nowhere Gayle King fans warn her to be 'careful' after CBS host admits 'stepping out' of her comfort zone with Shaboozey Yellowstone star Cole Hauser says it would be a 'shame to stop' telling the Dutton family story Ellie Goulding shares a rare snap of son Arthur, 4, and kisses him on the cheek as they adorably dress in matching Spider-Man costumes Sunday Brunch viewers bombard show with complaints just minutes into episode - sinking claws into 'boring and unfunny' Channel 4 scenes Ben Affleck is only 'one errant remark' away from being cancelled and believes the 'phone could stop ringing' despite his success Eddie Redmayne and Úrsula Corberó put on a steamy display as husband and wife in scenes from Sky TV's The Day Of The Jackal Jamie Oliver enjoys Coldplay concert with a female friend in Sydney - after he pulled his children's book from the shelves Mike Tyson has ditched veganism, is on a sex and cannabis ban and training six hours a day to prepare to fight 27-year-old Jake Paul Your turn next? Fans go wild for adorable photo of 'auntie' Taylor Swift posing with fellow Chiefs WAG's baby 'I thought to myself, what if it had been my daughter?' Queen Camilla praises mother of woman killed by her ex - and admits she wouldn't be as 'dignified' in the same position Friends fans complain of 'plot hole' in well-known episode which still 'drives them wild' 26 years later Strictly's Nancy Xu says she is 'gutted' that she and Shayne Ward will miss out on Blackpool and that she finds it 'unfair' that he was 'criticised' Geri Horner pulls series of animated facial expressions as she wraps up warm in stylish white outfit for autumn walk Ant McPartlin looks exhausted as he works up a sweat during gruelling workout ahead of I'm A Celebrity Ali Larter, 48, came to fame for her whipped cream bikini in Varsity Blues - see her now The truth behind Ben Shephard's This Morning absence revealed as ITV star fronts new project worlds away from daytime hit James Norton's surprising health battle - fans shocked to learn newly single Happy Valley hunk lives with deadly illness Lauren Pope kicks off festive season a little too early putting up her Christmas tree as she reveals she had anxiety about last year due to being a single mother Advertisement Follow DailyMail Subscribe Daily Mail Follow @dailymail Follow DailyMail Follow MailOnline Follow Daily Mail MORE DON'T MISS Radio 1 DJ Dean McCullough is the FOURTH star to arrive in Australia ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! How Sophie has become Kate's closest ally: 'Maternal' Duchess is a huge support to Princess of Wales - and it's come about because of void left by Meghan Furious Autumnwatch fans rage 'it's appalling and an insult to viewers!' as they skewer BBC for 'dumbing down' beloved nature show with complete overhaul Coleen Rooney reveals the secret to making her marriage with Wayne work as she confesses there were times she thought they wouldn't make it Emily Atack claims her party trick is 'worse than a one night stand' as she recalls the 'embarrassing' and 'horrendous' drunken night out Liam Payne larks about with close pal Rita Ora in unearthed video of them as the heartbroken singer pays tribute at the MTV EMAs Lorde shares a photo of a table littered with drugs and alcohol after celebrating her birthday Partied hard after celebrating with friends Keely Hodgkinson sparks concern as she displays her very sunburnt chest while posing in a tiny crop top during lavish holiday in Hawaii Tulisa reveals she'll QUIT showbusiness in the next two years despite wanting to relaunch solo career after I'm A Celebrity stint Major EastEnders 'Christmas spoiler REVEALED as actress accidentally leaves top secret script on train' Nightmare MTV VMAs worst dressed: Flamboyant outfits that fell flat as A-listers swarmed the red carpet in Manchester Olivia Rodrigo announced as fourth headliner for BST Hyde Park - as her support act is confirmed Kate's meaningful messages: How Princess of Wales used her outfits to pay tribute to Diana, the late Queen and her great-grandmother during Remembrance events BBC Breakfast in ANOTHER hosting shake-up as Jon Kay disappears from show without explanation The Penguin fans hail season one ending as 'the best thing DC has made' as Colin Farrell gives six-word response to calls for a second series Dancing On Ice's Vanessa Bauer says the show's new 24-hour bullying hotline is 'very necessary' ahead of its return in 2025 Viewers defend Boots' 'fabulous' Christmas advert starring Bridgerton's Adjoa Andoh after 'snowflake' critics blasted 'woke' plot Leomie Anderson ditches her gown for a VERY skimpy nude co-ord as she joins Love Island's Indiyah Polack and Maya Jama at MTV EMAs after party Shirtless Mark Wahlberg, 53, orders a trolley full of ice on room service as he continues his wacky health regime Sophie's been supportive from the start! Duchess helped an 11-year-old Princess Beatrice as she fainted on the balcony on Remembrance Sunday Listen as Katie Price performs her 2017 song I Got U at The Clapham Grand - so do you think her vocals make the cut? Strictly fans are left FUMING as they accuse Shirley Ballas of being 'biased' for sending home Shayne Ward in nail biting dance off Rita Ora breaks down in tears as she pays moving tribute to close friend Liam Payne at the MTV EMAs Emotional moment Kristina Rihanoff poses for incontinence pad campaign after she and husband Ben Cohen put their £1.75m home up for sale amid financial woes James Argent shares passionate kiss with new girlfriend Nicoline Artursson as besotted couple pack on the PDA for romantic Bonfire Night date Victoria Beckham displays incredibly toned figure as she poses for a mirror selfie - after husband David gave her new beauty product rave reviews Ice Spice flashes her abs in a cropped varsity top and low-rise pleated skirt as she steps out for dinner in Paris after performing her Y2K! World Tour Rita Ora leads the red carpet glamour in a pink feathered gown as she joins glamorous Maya Jama, Vick Hope and Raye at the MTV EMAs Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after her Australian visa was torn up - but there's a glaring problem with her new X-rated plan EXCLUSIVEKate Middleton's Remembrance Day pain: Emotional Princess of Wales appeared 'sad but regal' at Cenotaph, says body language expert Paddy McGuinness reveals he got 'choked up' over the huge support he's had for his 300 mile charity cycle challenge after feeling 'down and dejected' Rita Ora flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in ELEVEN incredible looks as she makes history as host of the MTV EMAs Raye leaves fans speechless with her vocals as she takes to the stage alongside Tyla and Shawn Mendes at the MTV EMAs Charli XCX is snubbed at MTV EMAs despite five nominations while Chappell Roan also leaves empty handed Ben Affleck looks miserable as 'spectacular' Jennifer Lopez shows him what he's missing on red carpet Sabrina Carpenter fan urinates all over the concert floor in San Francisco Ben Affleck treats his son Samuel, 12, to courtside seats at star-studded Lakers vs. Raptors game in LA Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo offer apologies for crying so much during Wicked promotion Kate wears Diana's ring in public for the first time since Christmas: Sapphire engagement ring is back after Princess opted to wear eternity bands during treatment Art Garfunkel recalls recent tearful reunion with Paul Simon after 'not seeing each other' for many years Margot Robbie shows off her midriff in a crop top less than a month after giving birth as she steps out in LA SPOILER ALERT: The real reason Yellowstone bosses sealed Kevin Costner's fate in first 30 seconds of bombshell season return Wolf Hall: The Mirror And The Light review: Cromwell's so menacing his glare could split a skull, writes CHRISTOPHER STEVENS MTV EMAs WINNERS FULL LIST: Taylor Swift dominates with FOUR gongs including Best Artist... while Raye and Tyla also win The White Lotus season 3 teaser shows first look at Blackpink's Lisa as hospitality host Keith Urban scrapes $600K Rolls Royce after dropping nepo baby Sunday Rose off at Billie Eilish concert Gavin Rossdale looks loved up with his Gwen Stefani lookalike girlfriend Xhoana X at MTV EMAs Happy Monday's star Bez causes CHAOS as he REFUSES to let go of the mic from Rita Ora in hilarious moment at MTV EMAs Nicola Peltz Beckham says her 'heart is shattered' in emotional tribute to Quincy Jones as she promises to look after his daughter Camila Mendes debuts bold new look as she gears up to film live-action remake of Masters Of The Universe Emmerdale's James Moore reveals future family plans after marrying partner Sophie Edwards as bride recalls their first date N-Dubz singer Tulisa Contostavlos is the third star to arrive in Brisbane ahead of this year's I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! Coleen Rooney will NOT be reunited with Wayne after her I'm A Celeb ordeal' as football fixtures leave him grounded EXCLUSIVEColdplay frontman Chris Martin's bizarre act before boarding a plane out of Australia bound for New Zealand Who left Strictly Come Dancing? Shayne Ward's dancing journey is over after receiving the lowest results and landing in the dance-off against Wynne Evans Strictly Come Dancing RECAP as Shayne Ward is eliminated in week eight after losing dance off to Wynne Evans Nicole Kidman looks elegant in a black coat and dress as she heads out in New York City s EXCLUSIVEViewers insist star of Lidl's Christmas advert is the 'double' of Princess Charlotte - so, who is the royal lookalike? Felicity Jones cuts a chic figure in a black blazer and jeans as she addresses the audience at a screening for her new film The Brutalist Shawn Mendes dons smart suit at MTV EMAs in first red carpet appearance since addressing sexuality Zoe Saldana and Kerry Washington glow in silky tops as they lead the stars at ACLU Bill of Rights Awards Christina Ricci oozes business chic in blazer dress at book signing in LA for her new tarot deck and guidebook Fans inundate Bruce Willis's wife with messages of support after she shares 'heartbreaking' video Right behind her Pregnant Gisele Bundchen puts on a leggy display in tiny shorts as she leaves her old house in Miami Beach with a large box Bradley Cooper's unrecognizable face in snap with Gigi Hadid sparks social media confusion: 'Is that AI Bradley?' SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone femme fatale Sarah Atwood's involvement in John Dutton's brutal death is revealed in Season 5 Part 2 premiere Joker 2 star says it is the 'worst film ever made' and that he and his co-stars knew it was 'going to bomb' while filming Michelle Keegan and Mark Wright show off VERY lavish Christmas lights and decorations at £3.5m Essex mansion Georgia Toffolo stuns in a sheer gown as she celebrates 30th birthday and proposal from James Watt with personalised beer Kim Kardashian embraces on-screen mother Glenn Close as they film Ryan Murpjy's new Hulu series All's Fair Ariana Grande fans point out NSFW error on Mattel's Wicked doll packaging - as collection risks mass recall Surfing royals: How Princess Diana sparked her sons' love for the ocean after Prince Harry recently rode waves in California and Prince William surfed chilly Scottish waters Rihanna looks totally at ease as she sits in front of her own Fenty Beauty ad at a bus stop in humorous post Halsey and fiancé Avan Jogia look loved-up at Lakers vs. Raptors NBA game in LA Prince Edward remembers 'all who have made the ultimate sacrifice' as he lays Remembrance Sunday wreath Big Brother viewers SLAM show's 'totally unfair' final twist just days ahead of grand finale: 'Sack whoever came up with this idea!' ROBERT HARDMAN: Courage of the Princess of Wales on parade - in a sign of what matters MOST to the royals Big target Khloe Kardashian throws niece Dream a soccer-themed 8th birthday bash No expense spared Jedward put on a VERY animated display in matching sequinned suits as they lark about on the red carpet at the MTV EMAs Rita Ora's proud mum Vera, 60, wears a chic black suit as she supports her daughter on the MTV EMAs red carpet Halsey and new fiancé Avan Jogia look loved up while enjoying a romantic lunch in NYC Yellowstone's surprising connection to Australia... and it's not actress Jacki Weaver Amelia Gray Hamlin puts on an edgy Y2K display in low-waisted jeans and busty tank top in Milan Elon Musk slams Dana Carvey's impression of him on post-election SNL and says show's been 'dying for years' Air Bud's Kevin DiCicco says he's homeless and dealing with major health problems James Bond fans have revealed the very unlikely Aussie who should play the next 007 Interesting choice Tulisa Contostavlos 'set to use I'm A Celebrity as launchpad for new solo career' as N-Dubz singer becomes third star to arrive EXCLUSIVEShe's the seductive 60s TV actress who was called the 'feline devil' by an iconic vigilante superhero - can you guess who? Bella Hadid flashes her incredible abs in tiny bikinis in racy photo dump from her recent trip to Dubai Looking good Adam Brody and Kristen Bell show off undeniable chemistry as they support Netflix's Nobody Wants This in LA Sam Thompson says he 'might get another bridge reunion' with Pete Wicks if he gets the axe from Strictly Come Dancing Kim Kardashian sports edgy black trench coat as she visits skin care clinic in Beverly Hills Jodie Turner-Smith sets pulses racing as she swaps her regal red carpet gown for skintight black PVC dress at the MTV EMAs Jada Pinkett Smith sparks health concern following rare date night with husband Will Smith The future's orange! Lorraine Kelly takes her adorable granddaughter to her first Dundee United game Proud granny Make breakfast TV great again! Eammon Holmes looks unrecognisable as he transforms into perma-tanned Donald Trump What Kate said to Sophie: Lip reader reveals conversation between Princess of Wales and Duchess of Edinburgh at Cenotaph Katherine Ryan, 41, puts on a busty display as she makes rare red carpet appearance with daughter Violet, 15, at the MTV EMAs Maya Jama channels Elizabeth Hurley as she slips into THAT career-making Versace safety pin gown to attend the MTV European Music Awards Lioness Chloe Kelly looks incredible in a cropped bandeau top and thigh-high boots on the red carpet at MTV EMAS What Taylor Swift told security guard: Pop star's cutting remark to her entourage during wild arrival to watch Travis Kelce Rita Ora shares a red carpet kiss with husband Taika Waititi ahead of her history-making THIRD hosting gig at the MTV EMAs Mariah Carey and son Moroccan dress up as Alvin and the Chipmunks for Halloween in rare family snap Venom 3 stays strong at the box office for third week in a row but new holiday film emerges to challenge it Gemma Atkinson turns heads in a busty leather dress as she poses on the MTV European Music Awards red carpet Travis Kelce sends girlfriend Taylor Swift wild as breaks Kansas City Chiefs history with another touchdown Jodie Turner-Smith puts on a show-stopping display in royal blue gown with a train and fascinator at the 2024 MTV EMAs SPOILER ALERT: Yellowstone fans furious over fate of Kevin Costner's John Dutton in Season 5 part two premiere Jeremy Clarkson WILL join protesting farmers at rally in Westminster this week after fears of 'police ban' Pregnant Charlotte Crosby shows off her baby bump alongside fiancé Jake Ankers at MTV EMAs in Manchester Mabel, 28, rocks a quirky checked dress as she joins her chic mum Neneh Cherry, 60, at the MTV European Music Awards Brooklyn Beckham goes for a spin in his classic Mustang in Los Angeles after adding another car to his impressive collection Emily Ratajkowski flashes leg in glam red coat as she walks her dog in New York City She looked super chic as she stepped out Vick Hope puts on a VERY leggy display in a racy thigh-high split skirt and sculpted bodice at the star-studded MTV EMAs James Norton admits split from ex-fiancée Imogen Poots was not his decision as he reveals heartbreaking reason they broke up Katie McGlynn puts on a VERY leggy display in a skimpy silver mini dress as she joins busty Liberty Poole at the MTV EMAs Aaron Taylor-Johnson cuts a debonair figure in a burgundy suit as he graces the red carpet at 2024 MTV EMAs Holly Hagan puts on a VERY busty display in a plunging gown as she cosies up to pregnant co-star Charlotte Crosby at MTV EMAs Tony Hinchcliffe breaks his silence on Trump election win after calling Puerto Rico a 'floating island of garbage' How to watch Yellowstone Season 5 Part 2 premiere in Australia as show begins new frontier without Kevin Costner . Brianna Chickenfry reveals why she won't get Zach Bryan lyric tattoo removed amid ugly split Interview Britney Spears claims was censored in 2016 is finally published Discussing her conservatorship EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb welcomes its first arrival! McFly star Danny Jones touches down at Brisbane Airport Taylor Swift's entourage get into heated altercation as she arrives to watch Travis Kelce and Chiefs Drama Leomie Anderson flaunts her jaw-dropping figure in a VERY skimpy tasselled gown as she poses up a storm on the MTV EMAs red carpet Netflix fans gripped by 'best show they've ever watched' - raving that crime thriller 'had them hooked just a few minutes in' EXCLUSIVEKelly Brook and her husband Jeremy Parisi land major ITV show deal after winning over viewers on BBC's Race Across the World Mel B shares a glimpse of her VERY organised shoe collection - after branding fellow Spice Girls 'd***heads' Raye puts on a very animated display as she stuns in a quirky bejewelled gown ahead of her performance at the MTV EMA's Pamela Anderson's secrets to embracing her natural beauty at 57: From sunrise walks to her no makeup rule and the one thing she avoids 'at all costs' Georgia Kousoulou shows off her bump in skintight dress as she celebrates her daughter's birth with 'dream baby shower' Gigi Hadid and Bradley Cooper enjoy date night as they watch Alyssa Milano performing on Broadway Molly Marsh dazzles as she shows off her enviable figure in sparkly burgundy dress at the MTV European Music Awards Katie Price jumps on stage during London drag competition and belts out her 2017 track I Got U - as she reignites celebrity feud Coleen Rooney suffers major blow ahead of I'm A Celebrity appearance as the first stars touch down in Australia EXCLUSIVEI'm A Celeb's Sam Thompson reveals he made emotional phone call to best pal Pete Wicks during thunderstorm-hit flight to Australia Chappell Roan 'parts ways' with her management team amid skyrocketing career Split Susan Sarandon admits she'll never work in Hollywood again and reflects on being dropped by her agent after Palestine remarks Pregnant Lottie Tomlinson cradles her bump in a stunning white dress as she celebrates her baby shower with twin sisters Phoebe and Daisy Noel Gallagher is 'working on a new album' with 'six tracks already in the bag' - but brother Liam is yet to contribute I was on The Undateables - the amount we actually got paid and how long it took to film a single date left me completely stunned . The Duchess of Edinburgh, 59, stepped into 'maternal' role at Cenotaph to help 'stoic' Kate Middleton - offering a supportive touch, says body language expert Leonardo DiCaprio ditches the models to party with his peers as he celebrates 50th birthday with Brad Pitt, 60, Paris Hilton, 43, Katy Perry, 40 and his long-time buddies Emmerdale's James Moore ties the knot with partner Sophie Edwards in emotional lakeside ceremony as bride reveals the soap star's heartfelt speech Kaia Gerber oozes glamour in Marc Jacobs gowns and opens up about her intellect being underestimated as she graces Vogue's December cover VERY dramatic exits! From Olivia Rodrigo disappearing through a hole to Gemma Collins' viral mishap - on-stage tumbles that will make you wince English acting legend is approached to be face of Marks & Spencer as bosses keen to sign 'chic, high calibre and sophisticated' star to evolve brand GMA host looks just like his famous father as he shares romantic proposal photos Will Reeve has made a made a big step in his life EXCLUSIVEZara McDermott will NOT be joining boyfriend Sam Thompson in Australia as he films I'm A Celebrity spin-off show Today's headlines Most Read Revealed - six of the top-seven favourites to replace Gary Lineker on Match of the Day are women as BBC... Putin was so close to launching a nuke in Ukraine that Britain was preparing for the fallout... as... One of the founders of world's oldest Breastfeeding support charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of... The Church of England's most prolific abuser John Smyth beat scores of boys till they bled. GUY ADAMS... Why it's so dangerous for doctors to dismiss heavy periods as 'normal': They could be a sign of a more... The cold and flu remedies that REALLY work: As US regulators warn many popular treatments simply don't make... Here are the number of sit-ups experts say you should be able to do for your age Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' Plane passenger sparks fierce debate after sitting in between couple on three-hour flight I didn't think there was ANY problem carrying suitcases from Mexico for two guys I barely knew... they said... How having cancer could REDUCE your risk of dementia later in life: The surprising truth about why surviving... RICHARD LITTLEJOHN: U.S. millionaires fleeing the 'Trump terror' for Starmer's basketcase Britain must be... Teenagers in Jewish youth football team 'attacked by knife-wielding pro-Palestine mob in Berlin' as violence... Two mothers who 'refused to quarantine' in hotels after claiming they flew to Dubai and got boob jobs could... The Skegness property gold rush: It's rated the world's worst holiday resort, but 'Skeggy' is now creating a... Premier League footballer probed over rape claims after previously being arrested in February last year Gary Lineker has been spotted for the first time since 'quitting Match of The Day': BBC star seen having... Strongman filmed lifting a Ford Transit van and pulled tractor with his bare hands while claiming car crash... Pressuring someone to end their lives is set to be a crime punishable by up to 14 years in prison under new... Apple quietly discontinuing flagship device due to lackluster sales World's oldest joke shop which supplied fake moustaches, magic wands and whoopee cushions to generations of... Middle class misery SPREADS! After pan-demonium over Le Creuset sale, now Britain is running out of... Cher: As I swore at the driver of a white convertible who had cut me up, I realised it was Warren Beatty.... Keir Starmer throws down the gauntlet to Donald Trump and urges him to 'show leadership' on climate change -... BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his... More than 16,000 people object to 'outrageous' plans for Norfolk 'mega-farm' housing 870,000 chickens and... Busta Rhymes praises 'superstar' Benny Hill as US rapper reveals himself as a VERY unlikely fan of the saucy... Even the nepo babies are flocking to Australia! Celeb offspring join the exodus of Brits who prefer life... Parents' fury after school tries to 'ban' Christmas references from its festive pantomime so it can be... Phil Foden's party-loving mother blasted by neighbours for 'deafening Disneyland two-hour fireworks display'... Why Cadbury's Chocolate Fingers are changing hands in France for more than TWENTY times their retail price Christmas pudding is no longer important for the festive dinner table, poll reveals Megan Fox is PREGNANT: Star expecting first child with Machine Gun Kelly as she debuts bump Scientist reverses her stage 3 cancer with viruses she grew in a lab - after refusing to go through hell of... Madonna quietly splits from toyboy Akeem Morris Woman in her 30s killed in Manchester house fire: Probe launched into inferno that 'young children were... Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant slams current popular music as 'narcissistic and processed' as he throws... I'm A Celebrity's 2024 lineup is CONFIRMED! Coleen Rooney and ab-flashing Tulisa get a jungle makeover in... Bishop of Newcastle joins chorus of voices calling for Archbishop Justin Welby to quit after 'ignoring'... I'm a survivor of child abuser John Smyth... Archbishop Justin Welby put his reputation above victims and... I went to the Le Creuset sale and it was HELL, it was absolute chaos and organisers completely... Rachel Reeves' National Insurance hike could force most nurseries to raise fees for parents, shocking survey... Families on former council estate facing £66,000 bill so Labour can hit net zero heating targets brand... Stephen Fry and Sophie Winkleman join host of celebs sending bizarre letter to Sadiq Khan demanding he... EDEN CONFIDENTIAL: What made Harry Styles flee chef Jamie Oliver's £15m home? Fury in Sweden at video of Syrian asylum seeker pushing a 91-year-old widow down stairs before violently... The lead up to Gary Lineker 'quitting Match of the Day' follows a long history of Twitter own goals and... Ryanair flight forced to make emergency landing at Stansted Airport after passenger dies onboard How Narinder Kaur went from Big Brother fame to outspoken TV panellist: From slating the royals to legal row... More than 3,000 privately-educated pupils applied to join state schools between June and September as... MORE HEADLINES Kate Middleton supporters slam TV presenter for 'disgusting' remark about Princess of Wales' appearance as she returns to royal duties after cancer treatment Liam Payne's 'drug dealer' speaks for first time and shares unseen photo: Argentinian waiter probed over One Direction star's death discloses new details about singer's last days and insists he did nothing wrong Fury in Sweden at video of Syrian asylum seeker pushing a 91-year-old widow down stairs before violently mugging her as she visits husband's grave The truth about how accurate that shocking Wolf Hall scene showing Anne Boleyn's execution really was Family of pharmacy student, 21, who killed herself after being wrongly told she had failed an exam hit out at university after 'totally unnecessary tragedy' Terrified friends burned to death 'trapped inside crashed Tesla after its electronic doors failed' PAN-demonium! Le Creuset sale sparks four-hour queue and police operation as hundreds of shoppers descend on warehouse to bag high-end luxury pot at cut price 'I have no regrets': Defiant council worker who was sacked for 'AdultHumanMale' instead of he/him tells how he's been forced to use his retirement savings to pay legal bill More than 3,000 privately-educated pupils applied to join state schools between June and September as Labour's VAT tax raid forces parents to pay extra £2,000 on fees Jill Biden gives Kamala Harris the cold shoulder after husband Joe was forced out of race the VP lost to Trump Mother is torn apart by pack of wild dogs on her walk to work after making desperate last phone call begging for help Moment 'six-foot black cat stalks through UK field hunting prey' as locals reveal fears a 'panther' is on the loose BBC axes Paddy McGuinness comedy about his life and divorce amid concerns it would be 'insensitive' to his former wife Christine after their break-up Artisan potter wins bitter £300k four-year battle with painter neighbour over ownership of 4ft-wide stream dividing their gardens Trump border czar Tom Homan has a blunt message for his critics as he defends his mass deportation plan Football's shame as Remembrance Sunday silence is scrapped after nine seconds when Celtic football fans chant pro-IRA songs through it Why IS Starmer attending COP29 summit? PM faces demands for UK to pay into $1TRILLION climate fund as he heads to Azerbaijan despite leaders from US, Germany, EU, China and India staying away One of the founders of world's oldest Breastfeeding support charity QUITS in protest at inclusion of transgender women - and says organisation has 'become a travesty of my original intent' Woman loses £20,000 in fake TV licensing scam after conman fooled her into using WhatsApp screen sharing so he could see what was on her phone Donald Trump Jr suggests his President-elect father will cut off aid to Ukraine with meme telling Zelensky 'you're 38 days from losing your allowance' Keir Starmer and Emmanuel Macron's crisis summit on how to deal with Trump: PM and French leader plan for US trade war, the end of Pentagon defence handouts and Ukraine peace deal Primary school teacher, 57, took fatal overdose after being urged to 'find a new hobby' by her GP to battle her depression, inquest hears Trump announces his new 'border czar' Tom Homan to lead the biggest mass deportation in U.S. history Mother, 54, who bled to death during botched gastric stomach operation in Turkey had turned to surgery because she could not buy another course of Ozempic, inquest hears How undercover cops posing as lorry drivers pulled off Britain's biggest drugs bust EVER after finding two tonnes of cocaine worth £186m hidden in cargo of bananas from Colombia Bonnie Blue issues defiant message after Australian authorities tore up her visa Pictured: Schoolgirl, 12, who tragically died after being hit by falling tree branch as devastated family pay tribute to 'shining light' Justin Welby 'has lost confidence of the clergy': Archbishop of Canterbury facing mounting pressure to quit for 'ignoring' sex abuse by Church of England's most prolific abuser Moment girl wearing headphones is run over by a train while crossing tracks - and somehow survives with minor injuries School Head of English wants Shakespeare axed for GCSEs because it 'sends pupils and teachers to sleep' and TikTok and Instagram posts studied instead MOST READ IN DETAIL Advertisement NEW ARTICLESHomeTop Share Back to top Home News Royals U.S. Sport TV Showbiz Femail Health Science Money Travel Podcasts Shopping Sitemap Archive Video Archive Authors Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Money Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group dmg media Contact us How to complain Leadership Team Advertise with us Contributors Terms Subscription Terms & Conditions Do not sell or share my personal information About MailOnline Privacy Settings Privacy policy & cookies Advertisement AdvertisementFlu update: Teenager on NSW Central Coast dies after contracting influenzaWatch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Search NationalNSWVICQLDSAWAACTTASNTLatestUS Election 2024Israel-HamasCrimeTechnologyHealthFinanceExplainersCost of LivingPoliticsWorldAsiaEuropeNZUKUSAChinaAfricaVideosLiveToday ShowACA60 MinutesSportOlympicsAFLCricketFootballLive scoresNRLWeatherFinanceBusiness newsFind and comparePersonal financeSmall businessCelebrityEntertainment newsCelebrityRoyal newsTV guideAppApp StoreGoogle PlayMeet The TeamAbout 9NewsContact usMeet the teamPrivacyTerms of useYour location:SYDNEYSYDNEY, NSWPERTH, WAMELBOURNE, VICHOBART, TASBRISBANE, QLDDARWIN, NTADELAIDE, SACANBERRA, ACTYour web browser is no longer supported. To improve your experience update it hereBREAKINGVictorian man jailed for exit-trafficking his wife 'as a chattel'NewsNationalTeenager on NSW Central Coast dies after contracting influenzaBy Savannah Meacham • AAP9:44pm Jul 11, 2023 Tweet Facebook Mail A﻿ teenage school student has died after contracting influenza on the New South Wales Central Coast.A Central Coast Local Health District spokesperson confirmed the death of a local student in the region with influenza B."We offer our sincere condolences to the student's family and friends at this difficult time," a spokesperson said.﻿READ MORE: Tens of thousands of Aussies told to claim slice of $52 millionA student at St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford has died from influenza. (Google Maps)The teenager ﻿was a student at St Joseph's Catholic College in East Gosford.9News.com.au has contacted the school for comment.﻿It comes as ﻿flu cases have surged in NSW, particularly among children.Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant warned last week there had been a 30 per cent increase in children admitted to hospital with the virus.﻿Children aged under 16 years made up around half of all emergency hospital presentations for influenza-like illness, and over a third of all influenza-like illness hospital admissions in the past week.READ MORE: Leaked documents reveal insane truth of Putin's 'ghost car'Chant said ﻿the numbers are "concerning" and said parents of children aged five to 16 should book their child in for a flu vaccine these school holidays."In recent weeks we have seen influenza cases rising fastest among very young children as well as those aged five to 16 years, with these two age groups often accounting for around half of all flu cases diagnosed in NSW each week," Chant said."The very best thing parents can do to keep their kids well this winter, and to reduce the risk of them being hospitalised due to influenza, is to ensure their children receive a flu vaccine if they haven't yet."Sign up here to receive our daily newsletters and breaking news alerts, sent straight to your inbox.Continue readingInfluenzaAustralianationalNew South Walescentral coasthealthflumedicalCONTACT USSend your stories to contact@9news.com.auAuto news: Surprising reason councils use these black road cables.Top StoriesBondi Westfield killer stopped mental health treatment years before rampageGirl's miracle survival exposes sailing boat murder spreeThree family members injured after faulty e-scooter battery sparks house fire'Ice maiden' and 'border czar': What we know about Trump's new team2 hours agoAboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.Stay well this winter | vic.gov.au JavaScript is required Skip to main contentMenu⁠Information and services⁠About the VIC Government⁠Search⁠HomeEarly Childhood Update - July 2023Stay well this winterStay well this winterMeasures early childhood education and care services can take to reduce the spread of influenza and other respiratory illnesses. As winter continues, health professionals anticipate that infections of influenza (flu) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) will increase among children in early childhood education and care services and the early years of school.Most children experience mild to moderate illness with symptoms such as fever, runny nose or cough. Some children, particularly babies and children with underlying medical conditions, can develop more severe illness. To help reduce the spread of respiratory illnesses this winter, please follow the tips outlined below.How to reduce the spread of flu and respiratory illnessesServices should encourage staff and children to:wash and sanitise their hands regularlyavoid touching their eyes, nose and mouth with unwashed handscover their nose and mouth when they cough or sneezeuse air purifiersmaximise external ventilationstay home if unwell and consult their GP or NURSE-ON-CALL as requiredstay up to date with their flu vaccinations.Our service has masks for staff and visitors if they want to wear them.Flu vaccinationsAnnual flu vaccination is recommended for everyone aged 6 months and over. Flu vaccines can be booked through GPs, pharmacies, or local council immunisation service, many of which can also provide COVID-19 vaccinations. Free flu vaccines are available as part of the National Immunisation Program for:Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 6 months and olderchildren aged 6 months to under 5 yearspeople aged 6 months or older with underlying medical conditions.Resources to promote good habitsFor support sharing this information with staff, children, parents and carers in your community, we have prepared the below draft text you can use in your newsletters or communications. For further information, please refer to the resources listed below:Stay well this winter on the Better Health Channel, translated into 16 languages. Influenza and immunisation on the Better Health ChannelRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV) on the Better Health ChannelInfluenza and RSV fact sheets for families from the Royal Children’s HospitalGetting vaccinated against influenza – resource collection Be a soapy hero! – additional resources for children about washing their hands properly.Newsletter text about staying well this winterShare this newsletter text with your community to let them know about measures they can take to prevent influenza and other respiratory illnesses.Find out moreEarly childhood education and care services will shortly receive more information about the management of notifiable diseases. In the meantime, if you have any questions, see Local Public Health Units | health.vic.gov.au.PreviousNAIDOC Week: honour and recognition ‘For Our Elders’NextEarly years professionals’ unique contribution to information sharing Updated 12 July 2023Print full documentEarly Childhood Update - July 2023Early Childhood Update - July 2023A warm welcome to a chilly Term 3, 2023Kindergarten Parent Opinion Survey 2022 sees positive resultsNAIDOC Week: honour and recognition ‘For Our Elders’Stay well this winterEarly years professionals’ unique contribution to information sharingUpdated early childhood Mentor Map2023 Annual kindergarten censusComplying with Australia’s foreign relations ActConsider delivering a bilingual kinder program from 2024More government funding available for early childhood infrastructureEarly Years Assessment and Learning Tool updateShare this pageFacebookX (formerly Twitter)LinkedInBack to topInformation and servicesCoronavirus (COVID-19) informationGrants and programsJobs and careersArts, culture and heritageBusiness and the workplaceCommunitiesEducation & trainingEnvironment, water and energyHealth and social supportHousing and propertyLaw and justiceSafety and emergenciesScience and technologySport and recreationTraffic and transportWorking in the Victorian GovernmentAbout the VIC GovernmentVictorian Government DirectoryThe Premier and ministersDepartments and agenciesStandards and guidelinesUsing Victoria's dataStrategies and policiesInquiries and royal commissionsThe Victorian Government acknowledges Aboriginal Traditional Owners of Country throughout Victoria and pays respect to their cultures and Elders past and present.PrivacyDisclaimerCopyrightFreedom of informationAccessibilitySitemapContact us© Copyright State Government of VictoriaVictoria government homeGirl, 11, dies suddenly from flu just days after 15-year-old passes away with virus | The US SunJump directly to the contentUS EditionUK EditionScottish SunIrish SunSearchMy AccountSign inNewsSportLifestyleTVEntertainmentMoneyTechMotorsTravelMoreMORE SECTIONSHealthRoyalsWellnessBettingSocial CasinoShoppingBlack FridayTopics A-ZMORE FROM THE SUNNewslettersUS JobsNewsWomen’s HealthMen’s HealthMental HealthHealthHealth NewsFAMILIES TORN APART Girl, 11, dies suddenly from flu just days after 15-year-old passes away with virus Alice FullerPublished: 5:48 ET, Jul 13 2023Updated: 11:17 ET, Jul 13 2023AN 11-year-old girl died suddenly after contracting flu amid a "concerning" rise in cases. Emma Schwab was hospitalised with the virus last week and passed away on July 6. 3Emma Schwab, 11, died after contracting flu3A fundraiser has been set up to help her devastated parents pay for her funeralRelatives and friends remembered her on Facebook as "the nicest little girl". A GoFundMe has been set up to help her devastated parents, from Australia, pay for her funeral.Organiser Mel Horton said: "Understandably the family is torn apart and any support would be greatly appreciated."The youngster, from Noosa on Queensland's Sunshine Coast, is the second child to die with influenza B in the past week.An unnamed 15-year-old girl passed away on the New South Wales Central Coast days earlier, it was confirmed on Tuesday. The teen's school, St Joseph’s Catholic College in East Gosford, described her as a "well-loved student" and a "true friend", ABC reports. The letter to parents added: "She was thoughtful to the needs of others and a valued member of our college community."Both deaths follow a reported 37 per cent increase in people rushing to A&E with flu-like symptoms.Most read in HealthBAR MASSACREHorror video shows gunmen storm bar and kill 10 in tourist hotspotUNHAPPY HOLIDAYSHuge Christmas light show canceled as store takes 'new approach' this yearPICTURE PERFECT?Teen Mom Jenelle submits pics of fridge including vodka bottle to courtbaby joyMegan Fox reveals she's pregnant with her and Machine Gun Kelly's first childMore than half of these patients were under the age of 16. There was also a 30 per cent rise in hospital admissions in the week to July 2, compared to the previous seven days, of which 40 per cent were kids. Queensland's Chief Health Officer, Dr John Gerrard, said: "We've never experienced anything like this before so exactly how this will pan out over the next few weeks or months is not clear. "It is uncharted territory."Health officials have urged parents to ensure their youngsters are vaccinated.Dr Kerry Chant, NSW chief health officer, said: "Sadly, our children’s hospitals are seeing an increasing number of children being admitted for care and some of these patients are seriously unwell."In recent weeks, we have seen influenza cases rising fastest among very young children as well as those aged five to 16 years, with these two age groups often accounting for around half of all flu cases diagnosed in NSW each week."My key message to you is please get your children vaccinated ahead of the return to school."'UNCHARTED TERRITORY'NSW health minister Ryan Park added: "Young children are considered to be at higher risk of severe illness from influenza and the best way parents can protect their kids is by getting them vaccinated."And a spokesperson for Queensland Health said: "Greater protection against influenza infection is observed in people who receive yearly influenza vaccination compared to those who did not receive any influenza vaccination."Influenza is an acute respiratory infection caused by viruses which circulate globally, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).There are four types - A, B, C and D. The first two cause seasonal epidemics. Influenza B has now overtaken influenza A as the dominant strain in Australia, it is reported. The main symptoms include a fever, cough, headache, muscle and joint pain, sore throat, runny nose and generally feeling unwell. Read More on The US SunGONE GOODS 3 Costco fan favorites to disappear from shelves & shoppers 'mourning the loss'BEAR-LY REAL Inside China's fake zoos with barking pandas & robot sharks…why it's a dangerSince May, at least 16 children have been admitted to intensive care at three major NSW hospitals with life-threatening flu complications. These include serious heart, brain and muscle-related issues.3St Joseph’s Catholic College in East Gosford, where the 15-year-old girl was a studentCredit: Google MapsTopicsChildhood diseases and illnessesChildren parenting and family lifeFacebookFlu & Aussie fluMedicines vitamins and vaccinesNHSParenting adviceAustraliaQueenslandYOU MIGHT LIKERECOMMENDED FOR YOUMORE FOR YOUMore from The SunGraphic WarningBAR MASSACRE Horror video shows gunmen storm bar and kill 10 in tourist hotspotShareExclusiveUNHAPPY HOLIDAYS Huge Christmas light show canceled as store takes 'new approach' this yearShareExclusivePICTURE PERFECT? Teen Mom Jenelle submits pics of fridge including vodka bottle to courtShareBreakingbaby joy Megan Fox reveals she's pregnant with her and Machine Gun Kelly's first childShareFollow The SunServicesSign Up To The SunAbout UsEditorial ComplaintsEditorial Standards, Policies and EthicsNews LicensingAdvertisingContact UsHelp HubTopic A-ZCookie SettingsContact PreferencesSun JobsShopping© 2020 THE SUN, US, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED | TERMS OF USE | PRIVACY | YOUR AD CHOICES | SITEMAPCOVID-19, Flu, RSV, Common Cold symptoms: How to tell which virus you've caught | Symptoms, treatments, at-risk groups explainedWatch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Search NationalNSWVICQLDSAWAACTTASNTLatestUS Election 2024Israel-HamasCrimeTechnologyHealthFinanceExplainersCost of LivingPoliticsWorldAsiaEuropeNZUKUSAChinaAfricaVideosLiveToday ShowACA60 MinutesSportOlympicsAFLCricketFootballLive scoresNRLWeatherFinanceBusiness newsFind and comparePersonal financeSmall businessCelebrityEntertainment newsCelebrityRoyal newsTV guideAppApp StoreGoogle PlayMeet The TeamAbout 9NewsContact usMeet the teamPrivacyTerms of useYour location:SYDNEYSYDNEY, NSWPERTH, WAMELBOURNE, VICHOBART, TASBRISBANE, QLDDARWIN, NTADELAIDE, SACANBERRA, ACTYour web browser is no longer supported. To improve your experience update it hereBREAKINGVictorian man jailed for exit-trafficking his wife 'as a chattel'NewsHealthI've got the sniffles, but how do I know whether I have a cold, COVID-19, RSV or flu?By Daniel Jeffrey7:01am Jul 13, 2023 Tweet Facebook Mail A bad flu season in Australia is being compounded by the spread of RSV and COVID-19 throughout the community.﻿The respiratory illnesses share many of the same symptoms, making it difficult to tell which one of them you've caught – or if you're just coming down with a common cold.Here's a bit more information that could help you tell whether you've caught RSV, influenza, COVID-19 or a cold.READ MORE: How Australian psychiatrists can prescribe psychedelicsIf you start getting the sniffles, you could have caught one of several different viruses. (iStock)What is RSV?While most people are already familiar with flu, colds and COVID-19, RSV – or respiratory syncytial virus – isn't the most well-known illness.﻿It's a highly contagious and common virus. In fact, almost everyone will have contracted it at least once by the time they turn three, according to the Australian Health Department.RSV will often be mild, but in severe cases it can prove life-threatening, particularly to ﻿young children.EXPLAINED: What is respiratory syncytial virus?﻿An electron microscope image human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a highly contagious and common illness than can prove life-threatening to children. (AP)What are the symptoms of COVID-19, flu, RSV and a cold?Each of the four diseases shares a few common symptoms – things like a runny nose, cough, fever or sore throat can be experienced by someone who's contracted any one of them.Some of the other symptoms, however, are more closely associated with one or two of the viruses. Fatigue, for example, is common for flu and COVID-19 but not the others.Here's a general run-down of the symptoms for each, according to information from the Australian Health Department and America's ﻿Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):COVID-19FluRSVColdFeverSometimesCommonCommonRareCoughCommonCommonCommonCommonSore throatCommonSometimesSometimesCommonShortness of breath/wheezingSometimesNoSometimesNoFatigueCommonCommonNoSometimesLoss of taste/smellSometimesSometimesNoSometimesBody achesSometimesCommonRarelyNoHeadacheCommonCommonSometimesCommonStuffyunny noseCommonSometimesCommonCommonDiarrhoeaRareSometimes in childrenNoNoSneezingCommonNoSometimesCommonVomitingSometimesCommonNoRare﻿Someone with RSV might develop an ear infection on top of the other symptoms, although this is less common, and lethargy is a symptom that doctors and other medical professionals will look out for in all four.Similar as the symptoms can be, there are some differences in their onset for the different illnesses.According to the CDC, flu symptoms tend to appear suddenly and all at once, generally sometime between one and four days after exposure to the virus.For COVID-19 and ﻿RSV, however, symptoms can develop gradually in stages – this can be over the course of between three to 10 days in the case of RSV, and one to 14 days for COVID-19.READ MORE: Aussie researchers make breakthrough IVF findings﻿Flu symptoms tend to appear suddenly and all at once, generally sometime between one and four days after exposure to the virus. (Centres for Disease Control)How long a ﻿bout of each illness lasts differs from virus to virus.An RSV infection, according to the CDC, will usually end after a week or two, and both influenza and a cold can last between a few days to a couple of weeks.People can also get over COVID-19 in a few days, but are not considered fully recovered until they've been asymptomatic for seven days, which can take weeks, according to the Australian government's Healthdirect service. ﻿However, if complications or a severe case of any of the illnesses arise, the sickness can last for much longer.READ MORE: What is the Indigenous Voice to parliament?﻿﻿So how can you tell if it's RSV, a cold, flu or COVID-19?Given how similar the symptoms are, you're generally not going to be able to tell which virus you have just by ﻿judging them.The best way to determine what you've caught is, of course, to get in touch with a doctor, who'll often be able to diagnose flu, RSV and a cold through signs and symptoms alone, and to get tested.Australia's Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) approved a triple RAT for use earlier this year, which tests for COVID-19, influenza A and B, and RSV.A double RAT that checks for COVID-19 and flu is also available.Both of those viruses, as well as RSV, can be diagnosed through a swab sent to a pathology lab for testing, while a blood test can also be taken to check for RSV.READ MORE: US approves first vaccine for RSV after decades of attemptsThe TGA approved a triple RAT for use earlier this year, which tests for COVID-19, influenza A and B, and RSV. (Nine)﻿Who is more vulnerable to each disease?A﻿s each of COVID-19, influenza, RSV and the common cold are all viral respiratory illnesses, it's no great surprise that there are similarities in the groups that are at risk from them.Being immunocompromised and having asthma are risk factors for all the diseases, while the federal government also says pregnant women and Indigenous Australians are at higher risk of developing complications from both COVID-19 and flu.In terms of age groups, severe illness from COVID-19 is generally associated with older people – those aged 65 or over.The latest COVID-19 strain spreading across the worldView GalleryRSV, on the other hand, is more typically linked to life-threatening cases in infants, although it can also pose a risk to older people who have existing heart, lung or immune issues, according to the Health Department.﻿Influenza is a worst-of-both-worlds case – both ﻿young children aged five or under and adults aged 65 or older are at risk of developing a serious case.The common cold tends to affect children more frequently than adults."Children may get between five and 10 colds a year, while adults may get two to four colds each year," Healthdirect﻿ says.READ MORE: What the different colours of mould in your house meanHow can I protect myself from the four viruses?Practising good hygiene, including regularly washing your hands, covering your nose and mouth when sneezing or coughing, cleaning surfaces and throwing out used tissues, can help stop the spread of each of COVID-19, the flu, RSV and the common cold.Wearing a mask can also help.READ MORE: The changes coming to your tax return this year﻿Vaccines have been approved in Australia for both COVID-19 and influenza. (AP)What treatments are available for RSV, flu, COVID-19 and the cold?Vaccines are available for both COVID-19 and flu. Adults are encouraged to get a COVID-19 booster every six months, while influenza is a seasonal vaccine.While the USA has approved an RSV vaccine, Australia has not – although there are hopes that one won't be too far away.﻿Anti-viral medications can be prescribed to ﻿at-risk COVID-19 patients, but antibiotics won't work for any of the four diseases, as they're all caused by a virus.Otherwise, treating each of COVID-19, flu, RSV and the cold at home is quite similar; get lots of rest, drink plenty of fluids and eat healthily.You can also relieve the symptoms of the viruses by taking ﻿over-the-counter medication like paracetamol or ibuprofen.Sign up here to receive our daily newsletters and breaking news alerts, sent straight to your inbox.Continue readinghealthExplainernationalAustraliafluInfluenzaCOVID 19CoronavirusVirusmedicalCONTACT USSend your stories to contact@9news.com.auAuto news: Most significant change to Tesla in three years. Top StoriesBondi Westfield killer stopped mental health treatment years before rampageGirl's miracle survival exposes sailing boat murder spreeThree family members injured after faulty e-scooter battery sparks house fire'Ice maiden' and 'border czar': What we know about Trump's new team2 hours agoAboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.Emma Schwab: 'Uncharted territory' as severe influenza outbreak claims life of teen girl in QueenslandWatch TVNewsSportLifestyleTravelEntertainmentProduct ReviewsCouponsStanDomainDriveConnect with us Search NationalNSWVICQLDSAWAACTTASNTLatestUS Election 2024Israel-HamasCrimeTechnologyHealthFinanceExplainersCost of LivingPoliticsWorldAsiaEuropeNZUKUSAChinaAfricaVideosLiveToday ShowACA60 MinutesSportOlympicsAFLCricketFootballLive scoresNRLWeatherFinanceBusiness newsFind and comparePersonal financeSmall businessCelebrityEntertainment newsCelebrityRoyal newsTV guideAppApp StoreGoogle PlayMeet The TeamAbout 9NewsContact usMeet the teamPrivacyTerms of useYour location:SYDNEYSYDNEY, NSWPERTH, WAMELBOURNE, VICHOBART, TASBRISBANE, QLDDARWIN, NTADELAIDE, SACANBERRA, ACTYour web browser is no longer supported. To improve your experience update it hereBREAKINGVictorian man jailed for exit-trafficking his wife 'as a chattel'NewsNational'Uncharted territory' as severe influenza outbreak claims life of teen girl in QueenslandBy Sarah SwainSavannah Meacham8:13pm Jul 13, 2023 Tweet Facebook Mail Queensland authorities are concerned about "uncharted territory" as a severe influenza outbreak claimed the life of an 11-year-old girl.Emma Schwab, from Noosa on the Sunshine Coast, ﻿died last Thursday after contracting influenza B."Understandably the family is torn apart and any support would be greatly appreciated," a fundraiser set up for her family said.READ MORE: BBC presenter named by wife in explicit photo scandalEmma Schwab, 11, died in hospital after contracting influenza B. (GoFundMe)It is believed Emma died at Sunshine Coast University Hospital.﻿A Sunshine Coast Health spokesman confirmed the "heartbreaking" death of the 11-year-old on Wednesday afternoon."We would like to extend our sincere sympathies to the family during this extremely difficult time," the spokesman said.Her death is now the subject of an investigation, Health Minister Shannon Fentiman confirmed.9News reporter Tim Arvier reported Emma presented at Noosa Hospital the day before her death before returning home."The matter is before the coroner for the investigation and I think that's really important as the coroner can look at the system as a whole," Fentiman said.﻿Acting Premier Steven Miles said the death is "awful and tragic"."Our thoughts are with her family," he said.﻿Chief Health Officer Dr John Gerrard﻿ has warned of a growing influenza outbreak."We've never experienced anything like this before so exactly how this will pan out over the next few weeks or months is not clear. It is uncharted territory," he said.﻿READ MORE: How do I know whether I have a cold, COVID-19, RSV or flu?It is believed Emma died at Sunshine Coast University Hospital.﻿ (Supplied)It is the second death of a young person from flu to be confirmed in the past week.A﻿ teenage school student died after also contracting influenza B on the NSW Central Coast.A Central Coast Local Health District spokesperson confirmed the death of a local student in the region.Last week, doctors called for parents to get their children vaccinated against flu after a spike in the number of youngsters being taken to hospital with flu-like illnesses.In the week before, there was a 37 per cent increase in NSW emergency department presentations with influenza-like illness in the state, the health department said.Influenza B has now overtaken influenza A as the dominant strain in the community."Influenza B usually causes mild illness in older people and adults but can cause severe disease in children and young people," Gerrard said.﻿Doctors are calling for families to get vaccinated as soon as possible with flu shots free for children aged six months to five years old.Gerrard said this severe outbreak isn't being caused by a more dangerous virus rather it's the result of years of social isolation."There are many young children who have never been exposed to influenza and so it's hitting them for the very first time," he said.﻿Sign up here to receive our daily newsletters and breaking news alerts, sent straight to your inbox.Continue readingfluhealthmedicalAustraliaqueenslandSunshine CoastnoosaCONTACT USSend your stories to contact@9news.com.auAuto news: Most significant change to Tesla in three years. Top StoriesBondi Westfield killer stopped mental health treatment years before rampageGirl's miracle survival exposes sailing boat murder spreeThree family members injured after faulty e-scooter battery sparks house fire'Ice maiden' and 'border czar': What we know about Trump's new team2 hours agoAboutContactWatch TVLive TVTV ShowsCategoriesConnect your TVHow to watchTV GuideNewsLatestNationalWorldPoliticsTechWeatherFinanceToday ShowA Current Affair60 MinutesSportLive ScoresOlympicsNRLCricketTennisAFLRugbyFootballAthleticsGolfCombatLifestyleLatestRoyalsStyleCelebrityKitchenTravelCoachYouParentingMoneyHoroscopesEntertainmentLatestTV ShowsMAFSThe BlockLove IslandLego MastersTipping PointThe SummitGetawayTravel GuidesProduct ReviewsTechnologyBeautyStyle + FashionLivingKitchenHealth + FitnessParentingGift IdeasRadio2GB3AW4BC6PRStanTV ShowsMoviesSportStan OriginalsDomainAdvice & GuidesProperty SearchHome LoansHome Price GuideDriveCar ReviewsCar NewsNew Car ShowroomCars for SalePedestrian TVEntertainmentNewsOnlineTelevisionCouponsUber EatseBayAmazonNikeHomeNewslettersWork with usAdvertise with usSupportTerms of usePrivacy© 2024 Nine Entertainment Co.No confirmed dengue cases in Ja, influenza numbers lower than expected | Loop Jamaica LoginJamaica Trinidad & Tobago Barbados Cayman Islands Haiti St. Lucia Caribbean NewsMain Navigation MenuNewsVideosJamaica NewsOpinionsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsSportBusinessEntertainmentCarnivalCarnival CalendarLifestyleOur EndzMonday Nov 11 25°CNews (current)VideosTopicsMain Navigation MenuNewsVideosJamaica NewsOpinionsWorld NewsCaribbean NewsFestivalsSportBusinessEntertainmentCarnivalCarnival CalendarLifestyleOur EndzLocationTrinidad & TobagoJamaicaBarbadosCayman IslandsHaitiSt. LuciaCaribbean NewsMy LoopSign InForgot Password?Create AccountBreaking News 'Walk wid yuh Umbrella!' Met Service says more rain, starting TuesdayHolness says Government 'not against' party promotersPolice High Command condemns killing of police sergeantFisherman 'Curry Cat' dies from Old Harbour Bay gun attackDubbi scores with 'Side Chick’ in UK on the Fiesta rhythmDesert of Malibu and Atomica secure spots in rich Mouttet MileChang guarding against squatting on lands near MoBay perimeter roadNWA to be reformed as part of mission to fix 'bad roads' nationallyPhoto: Digicel Foundation supports Poverty Eradication Day Cop succumbs to injuries after gun attack Monday Nov 11 25°C Jamaica News2 min readNo confirmed dengue cases in Ja, influenza numbers lower than expectedLoop News July 14, 2023 09:08 AM ETThere have been no confirmed cases of dengue in Jamaica since the start of the year and influenza cases are currently lower than expected for the time of year.This was announced earlier this week by the Minister of Health & Wellness, Dr Christopher Tufton, during a statement in the House of Representatives.While there are no confirmed cases, 100 suspected dengue cases with fever have been reported since the beginning of 2023 and half of these were in persons admitted to hospital.“The number of dengue cases have remained low since Jamaica last experienced an outbreak in 2018 to 2020,” Tufton said while noting that “clients who present with fever and other symptoms may be suspected of having dengue fever”. He said monthly numbers of suspected dengue cases have been below average throughout the year so far, with a quarter of suspected cases from Kingston and St. Andrew and another quarter from St Catherine.There have been no confirmed dengue deaths in Jamaica since 2020. Tufton cautioned that although a decreasing trend in dengue cases is noted, the dengue season will begin toward the end of the summer holidays so precautionary measures should be taken. These include preventing mosquito bites and destroying mosquito breeding sites.Meanwhile, weekly visits to public health facilities for influenza-like illnesses have decreased in all age categories over the past six weeks Tufton said. “Admissions for severe acute respiratory illnesses are below what is seen on average at this time of year (12 admissions per week). However, admissions for lower respiratory tract infections (pneumonia) were higher than expected in the last two weeks,” the health and wellness minister shared.“We usually see about 100-120 cases each week. We are now seeing a slight increase, with numbers up to 124 cases each week. Again, the public is reminded that persons at both extremes of age and persons with comorbidities are susceptible to severe respiratory infections caused by many different viruses.The same precautions that are advised for COVID-19, including the taking of the Influenza vaccine, are highly recommended,” Tufton said. “Further, all eligible persons should take influenza and COVID-19 vaccines – especially the vulnerable populations, which include the elderly, the young, pregnant women, and our healthcare workers,” Tufton added.He is also encouraging persons to continue to practice infection prevention and control measures, destroy mosquito breeding sites and follow the health ministry for updates. Loop is better in the app. Customize your news feed, save articles for later, view your reading history and more. Click the links below to download the app for Android and IOS. Related Articles Jamaica News CARPHA urges member states to continue surveillance for Dengue, ZikaJanuary 26, 2023 01:07 PM Jamaica NewsHealth Ministry advises of longer waiting time at public hospitalsJuly 6, 2023 02:39 AM Jamaica NewsMore than 1,100 new doctors to be employed in the public health systemMay 5, 2023 12:39 PMRecent Articles Jamaica News'Walk wid yuh Umbrella!' Met Service says more rain, starting Tuesday Jamaica NewsHolness says Government 'not against' party promoters Jamaica NewsPolice High Command condemns killing of police sergeantMore From Jamaica NewsPolice High Command condemns killing of police sergeant The High Command of the Jamaica Constabulary Force (JCF) has condemned the killing of a police sergeant in Portmore, St Catherine. In a release on Monday, the high command said the force is mournin Jamaica NewsNewsmaker: Rafael brings death, flooding, landslides, blockages… This week's featured overall development as Newsmaker of the Week is the range of developments surrounding Tropical Storm Rafael, especially the tragic deaths of two persons after it is believed that Jamaica NewsMan slapped with fraud charges after car deal goes south The Portland police have charged a 24-year-old man with fraudulent conversion, obtaining money by false pretence in relation to an incident at a financial institution in Port Antonio on Friday, Jamaica NewsLeslie Campbell to know fate in December re IC case on his statutories Former Jamaica Labour Party (JLP) Member of Parliament (MP) and later Senator and Cabinet Minister, Leslie Campbell, who is an attorney, is to learn his fate on December 12 relative to charges laid ag SportGrand Slam Track names Kingston as host city for 2025 inaugural event Grand Slam Track (GST), the global track and field league founded by four-time U.S. Olympic champion Michael Johnson, confirmed on Monday that Kingston, Jamaica, will be a host city for the inaugural LifestyleCourt says jilted bride must give back $70k ring Who gets to keep an engagement ring if a romance turns sour and the wedding is called off? That’s what the highest court in Massachusetts was asked to decide with a US$70k ring at the centre of the Sponsored StoriesTalking Health in 5: Spotting the early signs of diabetes Feeling thirstier than usual or experiencing an increased appetite, even with weight loss? These could be signs of diabetes. In this edition of Talking Health in 5, Dr Karen Phillips, a consult Brought To You ByLASCO Rolled OatsShop the look: Lift your living space with Courts If you loved some of the items you saw in the last episode of Operation Transformation, here’s your chance to shop the look. All these items are available on Courts website and in-store. Tusc Brought To You ByCourts JamaicaMichael from Longville Park wins Courts OHT bedroom makeover In the fourth episode of Courts Operation Home Transformation, a lucky Loop Jamaica reader won a Bedroom makeover. Michael Matthan won himself a J$500,000 dream Bedroom makeover, c Brought To You ByCourts JamaicaParis 2024 Photo of the Day: Tears of Joy after silver medal jump! Jamaica’s premier women’s triple jumper, Shanieka Ricketts, was in tears Saturday afternoon after winning her first Olympic medal and Jamaica’s second of the 2024 Games, a brilliant silver, inside the Brought To You ByDigicel The Caribbean’s Most Downloaded News AppSign Up For Our NewsletterStay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Loop News Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Comments Policy About Us Contact Us Submit an Article Cookie PolicyCOPYRIGHT 2020 BY DIGICEL | ALL RIGHTS RESERVEDDublin Zoo flamingo with avian flu did not die from infectious disease XSign in My Account Sign out  Sign in Subscribe My Account Sign outsubscribernewsIreland General Election 2024 Munster Cork World Court & Crime Politics Climate & Sustainability History Spotlight Longreads Obituaries News - Subscriber Content sportGAA GAA - Cork Club Championships Soccer Rugby Racing Golf Business Of Sport Other Sports Live Sport Sport Columnists Sport - Top Picks Sport - Subscriber Content lifestyleieFOOD Health & Wellbeing Arts & Culture Books Outdoors Fashion & Beauty Parenting Parenting Podcast Advice Travel People Celebrity Motoring Lifestyle - Subscriber Content businessCompanies Economy Farming Munster Business Cork Business Technology ieBusiness Podcast Business - Subscriber Content propertyResidential Commercial Planning Development & Construction Home & Gardens Property & Home - Subscriber Content opinionColumnists Comment & Analysis Our View Your View Opinion - Subscriber Content LISTENGAA Podcast ieBusiness Podcast ieInvestigations Podcast ieParenting Podcast - Growing Pains Mick Clifford Podcast Mick Clifford - Civil War Series Politics Podcast Rugby Podcast Subscriber Podcasts MORE Archive Competitions Contact Us ePaper Helplines MyHome.ie Newsletters Newspaper books Photosales Place ad Podcasts Puzzles Recruit Ireland Sponsored Showcase Sponsored Reports Subscribe Weather Who We Are Cookie settings Ireland General Election 2024 Munster Cork World Court & Crime Politics Climate & Sustainability History Spotlight Longreads Obituaries News - Subscriber Content GAA GAA - Cork Club Championships Soccer Rugby Racing Golf Business Of Sport Other Sports Live Sport Sport Columnists Sport - Top Picks Sport - Subscriber Content ieFOOD Health & Wellbeing Arts & Culture Books Outdoors Fashion & Beauty Parenting Parenting Podcast Advice Travel People Celebrity Motoring Lifestyle - Subscriber Content Companies Economy Farming Munster Business Cork Business Technology ieBusiness Podcast Business - Subscriber Content Residential Commercial Planning Development & Construction Home & Gardens Property & Home - Subscriber Content Columnists Comment & Analysis Our View Your View Opinion - Subscriber Content GAA Podcast ieBusiness Podcast ieInvestigations Podcast ieParenting Podcast - Growing Pains Mick Clifford Podcast Mick Clifford - Civil War Series Politics Podcast Rugby Podcast Subscriber Podcasts Archive Competitions Contact Us ePaper Helplines MyHome.ie Newsletters Newspaper books Photosales Place ad Podcasts Puzzles Recruit Ireland Sponsored Showcase Sponsored Reports Subscribe Weather Who We Are newssportlifestyleopinion IN FOCUS: General Election Donald Trump Middle East Crisis ieExplains ieVideo Subscribe Puzzles Weather HomepagenewsDublin Zoo flamingo with avian flu did not die from infectious disease Other flamingos, who are all vaccinated against avian or bird flu, were 'moved to a controlled area'. Picture: Leon Farrell/ PhotocallFri, 14 Jul, 2023 - 13:44Alison O'Reilly    A flamingo that tested positive for avian flu at Dublin Zoo did not die from the infectious disease, the Department of Agriculture has confirmed.Earlier this week, the zoo said it had closed its top attraction of the pink birds, in a precautionary move. It is home to about 100 Chilean flamingos.The other flamingos, who are all vaccinated against avian or bird flu, were also “moved to a controlled area” and a contingency plan was put in place.However, on Friday, a spokesperson for the Department of Agriculture told the Irish Examiner: “It is not believed that this bird died of HPAI [Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza] as this postmortem confirmed another cause of death that was not viral.” They added the finding of avian flu was “incidental”. There will also be no requirement for “surveillance and protection zones and the flock will not need to be culled as is the case for poultry”, the statement said.The finding in the dead bird, however, has caused concern for poultry farmers here, after the final set of avian flu restrictions were lifted in June. This allowed domestic birds outdoors again and visitors on farms after a lockdown order was put in place last November, following an outbreak of the infectious disease.But the Department of Agriculture said as the “disease is in a captive bird flock then it will not impact upon Ireland’s disease status for poultry exports”.The 12-year-old bird that died was examined in a laboratory for a routine autopsy on July 6, which confirmed a finding of the HPAI.'Several vaccinations' The Department of Agriculture also explained the bird had received “several vaccinations” against avian flu and the “the HPAI finding is considered by the department’s pathologists to be incidental as it was only detected in intestinal tissues and was not detected elsewhere in the body as is usually the case when HPAI infection exists”. “The collection of flamingos is subject to appropriate isolation and clinical surveillance, including laboratory examinations, until the department can ensure that the animals do not pose a risk of transmission of HPAI," the department said.The European Commission and the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) has been notified of the positive finding of avian flu in the flamingo at Dublin Zoo.An emergency plan has been put into action at the zoo, which includes measures to prevent the spread of disease to other animals.The HSE said it had visited tourist attraction and was in communication with zookeepers and personnel.Meanwhile, the HSE has also advised the public not to touch sick or dead birds when out and about over the summer, due to the risk of contracting avian flu.In a warning issued earlier this week, Director of the HSE Health Protection Service Dr Eamonn O’Moore said "although it is very unusual for people to catch bird flu, it can happen”. “We are advising people not to pick up or touch dead or sick wild birds, and to keep their pets away from them.”Read MorePet farms hoping for flocks of visitors after bird flu restrictions lifted Irish Examiner’s WhatsApp channelFollow and share the latest news and stories More in this section Library staff live with a 'pervasive undercurrent of anxiety and unease' Simon Harris and Mary Lou McDonald sent in a spin by jiving shopkeeper Met Éireann issues status yellow fog warning for 18 counties Bird FluOrganisation: Dublin Zoo 'Clearly hadn't read the manifesto': Micheál Martin hits back at Fine Gael barbREAD NOW Subscribe Now Lunchtime News Sign up to the best reads of the week from irishexaminer.com selected just for you. Sign Up Please click here for our privacy statement. LatestGardaí hope new search will provide closure in Jo Jo Dullard case after 29 years Library staff live with a 'pervasive undercurrent of anxiety and unease' Sammie Szmodics believes Ireland attack 'not far away from clicking' Mental preparation helped Drogs to FAI Cup glory Most Read'Jo Jo Dullard deserves to be laid to rest after all this time'Monday, November 11, 2024 - 10:00 PM Met Éireann issues status yellow fog warning for 18 countiesMonday, November 11, 2024 - 7:00 PM Chance to enter GAA jersey market will attract big brandsMonday, November 11, 2024 - 9:00 PM news IrelandMunsterCourt & CrimeSpotlightWorldsport GAASoccerRugbyRacingGolfOther SportsPodcastsbusiness EconomyCompaniesMunster BusinessFarmingTechnologyopinion ColumnistsComment & AnalysisOur ViewYour ViewHelp FAQContact UsPrivacy PolicyBrand SafetyCookie PolicyCookie SettingsPush Notification PreferencesMobileSubscriptionsInfo Terms and ConditionsHome deliveryRSSNewslettersPlace adWho We AreSitemap© Examiner Echo Group Limited, Linn Dubh, Assumption Road, Blackpool, Cork. Registered in Ireland: 523712. Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Brand Safety FAQ Help Contact Us Terms and Conditions © Examiner Echo Group LimitedTourists warned off visiting Scottish beach as disease kills hundreds of birds | The Independent Stay up to date with notifications from The IndependentNotifications can be managed in browser preferences.Not nowYes pleaseJump to contentAsia EditionChangeUK EditionUS EditionEdición en EspañolSign up to our newslettersSubscribe nowLog in / Register IndependentUS electionBlack FridaySubscribeMenuNewsNewsUKUSWorldUK PoliticsBrexitHealthBusinessScienceSpaceNews VideosSportSportFootballParis 2024 OlympicsFormula 1Rugby UnionCricketTennisBoxingUFCCyclingGolfSport VideosVoicesVoicesEditorialsLettersJohn RentoulMary DejevskyAndrew GriceSean O’GradyCultureCultureFilmTV & RadioMusicGamesBooksArtPhotographyTheatre & DanceCulture VideosLifestyleLifestyleShoppingBeauty Fitness & WellbeingTechMoneyFood & DrinkFashionLove & SexWomenHealth & FamiliesRoyal FamilyMotoringElectric Vehicles Car Insurance Deals Lifestyle VideosIndyBestIndyBestAdvisorHome & GardenTechBroadband dealsFashion & BeautyDealsFood & DrinkKidsBooksTravel & OutdoorsSports & FitnessTravelTravelHotel ReviewsNews & AdviceSimon CalderCruisesUKEuropeUSAAsiaAustralia & New ZealandSouth AmericaC. America & CaribbeanMiddle EastMorePremiumPolitics ExplainedEditorialsVoicesLong ReadsNews AnalysisToday’s EditionClimateNewsClimate 100Electric Vehicles VoicesSustainable LivingExplainedClimate VideosSolar Panels SGITVBehind The HeadlinesOn The GroundDecomplicatedYou Ask The QuestionsBinge WatchMusic BoxLove LivesTravel SmartWatch on your TVToday’s EditionCrosswords & PuzzlesMost CommentedNewslettersAsk Me AnythingVirtual EventsWine Offers VouchersIndy100Betting SitesCasino Sites Thank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged inTravelNews & AdviceTourists warned off visiting idyllic Scottish beach as disease kills hundreds of birdsMore birds could be washed up on the shore, says council Benjamin ParkerWednesday 12 July 2023 11:25 BSTCommentsSubscribe to Independent Premium to bookmark this articleWant to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Premium subscription today.SubscribeAlready subscribed? Log inBird flu is blighting the population around Stonehaven (Getty Images)Sign up to Simon Calder’s free travel email for expert advice and money-saving discountsGet Simon Calder’s Travel emailGet Simon Calder’s Travel emailSIGN UPI would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy policyBeachgoers have been warned after a fresh wave of bird flu killed hundreds of animals at a popular tourist spot on coast of Scotland.On Monday (10 July), the bodies of 330 seabirds were removed from Stonehaven beach, on the north-east coast, by Aberdeenshire Council workers, reports Aberdeen Live. Yesterday, another 100 were removed, as the disease continues to ravage the aviation population in the country.The Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was also forced to humanely destroy a number of live birds suspected of having bird flu.Those visiting the beach have been told to stay away from the bodies of any birds to avoid the risk of infection. The risk of catching avian flu was “extremely low”, said the council, but has advised tourists to leave the birds in-situ due to other disease that wild birds can carry.“Our teams have been closely monitoring the number of deaths in the bird population over recent days across the region,” An Aberdeenshire Council spokesperson said.They added: “The council has finite resources, but we will look to remove large concentrations of birds from popular areas of highest footfall. People should be aware, however, that there will inevitably be more birds washed ashore with each tide so beaches may not be cleared entirely.”They advised that people “keep pets and children away from any dead or sick birds and don’t touch wild bird feathers or surfaces contaminated with droppings.”Residents can report where there are more than 10 dead birds in an area via the council’s online form on its website.Last year, one of England’s most important seabird colonies was closed to visitors due to the spread of bird flu.The Farne Islands off the Northumberland coast – home to around 200,000 birds – were affected by a deadly outbreak of avian influenza that had spread from the UK’s domestic population.More aboutbird fluScotlandBeachesJoin our commenting forumJoin thought-provoking conversations, follow other Independent readers and see their repliesCommentsMost PopularPopular videosSponsored FeaturesGet in touchContact usOur ProductsSubscribeRegisterNewslettersToday’s EditionInstall our appArchiveOther publicationsInternational editionsIndependent en EspañolIndependent ArabiaIndependent TurkishIndependent PersianIndependent UrduThe StandardExtrasAdvisorPuzzlesAll topicsBetting OffersVoucher codesCompetitions and offersIndependent AdvertisingIndependent IgniteSyndicationWorking at The IndependentLegalCode of conduct and complaintsContributorsCookie policyPrivacy policyUser policiesModern Slavery StatementThank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged inFlu cases on the rise with more kids admitted to hospital | 7NEWS Click to open navigationTuesday 12 November 2024Click to open navigationLocal news:Sydney, NSWSydneyMelbourneBrisbaneQueenslandPerthAdelaideHobartDarwinLocalVideoSportLifestyleEntertainmentTechPoliticsBest PicksFinanceWorldWeatherMotoringCouponsContact UsTV GuideSunriseThe Morning ShowSpotlightPodcasts7NEWS AppNewsletters Stream NewsAbout UsContact UsAdvertise With UsFAQsPrivacy PolicyEditorial PolicyTerms Of UseShare to FacebookShare to InstagramEmail UsShare to YoutubeShare to TikTokShare to X7NewsWatch 7NEWSLocalVideoSportLifestyleEntertainmentPoliticsBest PicksTV GuideCouponsMotoringBreakingNSW town rocked by 4.1 magnitude earthquakeTop VideosSport VideosEntertainment VideosLifestyle VideosNews VideosPolitics VideosSunrise VideosThe Morning Show VideosBusiness VideosTechnology VideosTravel VideosWorld VideosLatest videosNSW constable charged with taser death of a 95-year-oldEmperor penguin found on Australian shores for first timeTV star attracts outrage over comments about Princess KateThe first hearing of the Bondi Junction stabbing attack inquest has concluded Entertainment VideosSport VideosLifestyle VideosNewsNSW town rocked by 4.1 magnitude earthquakeThe quake hit the mining town just after midday on Tuesday.1 min readKindergarten teacher’s family speaks out following her heroic deathEleanor Bryant died helping get children out of harm’s way when an out-of-control water tanker ploughed through a preschool playground.3 min read'Got her': Jury watches confronting moment cop fires taser at 95-year-old woman2 min read‘Took so long’: Shocking new detail emerges as Westfield stabbing inquest begins3 min readFather chases down teens who allegedly burgled his home twice in one day2 min readOur Network7plus7BravoSunriseThe Morning ShowSpotlight7TWO7mate7Sport7RegionalThe NightlyThe West AustralianPerthNowTV GuideCoupons7MerchandiseOur PartnersView.com.auHealthengineHuddle InsuranceCarExpertRaiz InvestInstitchuStarts at 60IseekplantMadpawsWilled7NEWS AppStay informed with the free 7NEWS app. Available on iOS & Android.NewslettersBreaking NewsMorning EditionSports WrapConsumer AffairsLifestyleConnect With UsAbout UsContact UsAdvertise With UsFAQsPrivacy PolicyEditorial PolicyTerms & ConditionsFollow 7NEWS on FacebookFollow 7NEWS on InstagramEmail 7NEWSWatch 7NEWS on YouTubeFollow 7NEWS on TikTokFollow 7NEWS on Twitter