Webinar Tuesday, July 16, 2024 - Update on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus for Clinicians and Healthcare Centers Skip directly to site content Skip directly to search EspaÃ±ol | Other Languages An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People Search Submit Emergency Preparedness and Response Update on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus for Clinicians and Healthcare Centers Print Minus Related Pages Your browser does not support HTML5 video. The fully captioned video and edited transcript will be posted within the next few days. Update on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus for CliniciansLow Resolution Video Click here to view the recording with the integrated audio transcript using the password below. Password: 9r+6G%U8 “Please note special time of this COCA Call.” This COCA Call will be held on Friday, March 27, 2020 This COCA Call will be held on Friday, March 27, 2020 Call DetailsWhen: Thursday, June 27, 2024 2:00 PM – 3:00 PM ET Webinar Link: https://www.zoomgov.com/j/1617016999 Webinar ID: 161 701 6999 Passcode: 059864 Telephone: +1 669 254 5252, or, +1 646 828 7666 One-tap mobile: +16692545252,,1617016999#,,,,*059864# International numbers Add To Calendar = Free Continuing Education Overview Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) (H5N1) virus is widespread among wild birds and continues to cause outbreaks in poultry and spillover to mammals. In March 2024, HPAI A(H5N1) virus was detected in dairy cattle. To date, there have been three human cases of HPAI A(H5N1) virus infection identified in dairy farm workers in the United States. The risk to the public from HPAI A(H5N1) viruses is low; however, people who have job-related or recreational exposure to infected birds or animals, including dairy cattle, are at greater risk of HPAI A(H5N1) virus infection. During this COCA Call, presenters will give an update on the current outbreak in the United States and current CDC surveillance and monitoring efforts. They will also provide information for clinicians on testing, using antivirals, and infection prevention and control recommendations. Presenters Alicia Budd, MPH Team Lead National Surveillance and Outbreak Response Team Epidemiology and Prevention Branch Influenza Division National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Ryan Fagan, MD, MPH&TM Medical Officer Prevention and Response Branch Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Tim Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP Chief Medical Officer Influenza Division National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Call Materials View slides [PDF – 2 MB] View transcript [PDF – 89 KB] Call DetailsWhen: Tuesday, July 16, 2024, 2:00 PM – 3:00 PM ET Webinar Link: https://www.zoomgov.com/j/1618350375 Passcode: 143703 Dial In: US: +1 669 254 5252 or +1 646 828 7666 International numbers One-tap mobile: US: +16692545252,,1618350375#,,,,*143703# Webinar ID: 161 835 0375 Add to Calendar Due to the high demand we anticipate for this COCA Call, we encourage participants to consider viewing on Facebook. To see the call live, please click on COCA’s Facebook Page. Call Information Registration is not required. Date: Tuesday, July 16, 2024 Time: 2:00 PM – 3:00 PM ET A few minutes before the webinar begins, please click the link below to join: https://www.zoomgov.com/j/1618350375 Webinar ID: 161 835 0375 Passcode: 143703 Telephone: +1 669 254 5252 or +1 646 828 7666 One-tap mobile: +16692545252,,1618350375#,,,,*143703# International Numbers Call Objectives COCA Call Objectives At the conclusion of the session, the participant will be able to accomplish the following: Cite background information on the topic covered during the presentation. Discuss CDC’s role in the topic covered during the presentation. Describe the topic’s implications for clinicians. Discuss concerns and/or issues related to preparedness for and/or response to urgent public health threats. Promote health improvement, wellness, and disease prevention in cooperation with patients, communities, at-risk populations, and other members of an interprofessional team of healthcare providers. Activity-Specific Objectives Discuss the epidemiology and clinical features of human cases of HPAI A(H5N1) virus infection. Describe risk of human infection with HPAI A(H5N1) viruses, identify higher risk populations, and what to assess in clinical settings. Describe testing, using antivirals, and infection prevention and control recommendations for patients with HPAI A(H5N1) virus infection. Additional Resources None at this time. Continuing Education Instructions for Obtaining Continuing Education (CE) To receive continuing education (CE) for WC4520R-071624—Update on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus for Clinicians and Healthcare Centers, please visit CDC TRAIN and search for the course in the Course Catalog using WC4520R-062724. Follow the steps below by August 19, 2024. The registration code is COCA071624. To receive continuing education (CE) for WD4520R-071624—Update on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus for Clinicians and Healthcare Centers, please visit CDC TRAIN and search for the course in the Course Catalog using WD4520R-071624. Follow the steps below between August 20, 2024, and August 20, 2026. Register for and complete the course. Pass the post-assessment at 75%. Complete the evaluation. Visit Your Learning to access your certificates and transcript. ACCREDITATION STATEMENTS In support of improving patient care, The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is jointly accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME), the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE), and the American Nurses Credentialing Center (ANCC), to provide continuing education for the healthcare team. CME: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designates this live activity for a maximum of 1 AMA PRA Category 1 Credits™. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity. AAPA CME: Credit Designation Statement – Live The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been authorized by the American Academy of PAs (AAPA) to award AAPA Category 1 CME credit for activities planned in accordance with AAPA CME Criteria. This activity is designated for 1 AAPA Category 1 CME credits. PAs should only claim credit commensurate with the extent of their participation. CNE: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designates this activity for 1 nursing contact hours. CPE: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention designated this Knowledge-based event for pharmacists to receive 0.1 CEUs in pharmacy education. The Universal Activity Number is JA4008229-0000-23-099-L04-P and enduring is JA4008229-0000-23-100-H04-P. CEU: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is authorized by IACET to offer 0.1 CEUs for this program. CECH: Sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a designated provider of continuing education contact hours (CECH) in health education by the National Commission for Health Education Credentialing, Inc. This program is designated for Certified Health Education Specialists (CHES®) and/or Master Certified Health Education Specialists (MCHES®) to receive up to 1 total Category I continuing education contact hours. Maximum advanced level continuing education contact hours available are 1. Continuing Competency credits available are 1. CDC provider number 98614. AAVSB/RACE: This program has been submitted (but not yet approved) for 1 hours of continuing education credit in jurisdictions which recognize AAVSB RACE approval; however, participants should be aware that some boards have limitations on the number of hours accepted in certain categories or restrictions on certain methods of delivery of continuing education. For Certified Public Health Professionals (CPH): The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is a pre-approved provider of Certified in Public Health (CPH) recertification credits and is authorized to offer 1 CPH recertification credits for this program. DISCLOSURE: In compliance with continuing education requirements, all planners and presenters/moderators must disclose all financial relationships, in any amount, with ineligible companies over the previous 24 months as well as any use of unlabeled product(s) or products under investigational use. CDC, our planners, presenters, and moderators wish to disclose they have no financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies whose primary business is producing, marketing, selling, re-selling, or distributing healthcare products used by or on patients. Content will not include any discussion of the unlabeled use of a product or a product under investigational use with the exception of Dr. Tim Uyeki who will discuss using oseltamivir at higher dosing for post-exposure prophylaxis than for controlling seasonal influenza. CDC did not accept financial or in-kind support from ineligible companies for this continuing education activity. Target Audience Physicians Nurses Pharmacists Veterinarians Physician Assistants Health Educators Other Clinicians Hardware/Software System requirements to use Zoomexternal icon Additional Information Contact Information: coca@cdc.gov Support/Funding: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Office of Emergency Risk Communication Method of Participation: You may participate in the educational activity by viewing the program information above. Sign up to receive COCA Call Announcements, COCA Newsletters and other COCA resources by entering your email address: Email Address Submit Last Reviewed: June 28, 2024 Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate homeClinician Outreach and Communication Activity (COCA) About COCAplus icon COCA Partners COCA Calls/Webinarsplus icon 2024 Calls/Webinarsplus icon 2024â2025 Recommendations for Influenza Prevention and Treatment in Children: An Update for Pediatric Providers Resurgence of New World Screwworm in the Americas: What Healthcare Providers Need to Know Updates on Diagnostic Testing and Outpatient Treatment for COVID-19 and Influenza New Clinical Tools and Resources to Support Patients with Prolonged Symptoms and Concerns about Lyme Disease Update on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus for Clinicians and Healthcare Centers Mpox Update: Clinical Management and Outbreaks Overdoses Involving Xylazine Mixed with Fentanyl: Clinical and Public Health Implications Diagnostic Testing and Treatment Guidelines for COVID-19 and Influenza 2023 Calls/Webinarsplus icon Protecting Infants from Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Algorithms for Diagnosing the Endemic Mycoses Blastomycosis, Coccidioidomycosis, and Histoplasmosis Preparing for the Upcoming Respiratory Virus Season: Recommendations for Influenza, COVID-19, and RSV Vaccines for Older Adults 2023-2024 Recommendations for Influenza Prevention and Treatment in Children: An Update for Pediatric Providers We Must Maintain Measles Elimination in the United States: Measles Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, and Prevention Clinical Vaccination Guidance for Pregnant People Review of Malaria Diagnosis and Treatment in the United States What Providers Need to Know about Zoonotic Influenza Evaluating and Supporting Patients with Long COVID in Returning to Work Interim Recommendations for Diagnosing and Managing Suspected Fungal Meningitis Associated with Epidural Anesthesia Administered in Matamoros, Mexico Mpox Update: Stay Up to Date on Testing, Treatment, and Vaccination Updated Recommendations for COVID-19 Vaccine Use Epidemiology, Testing, and Management of Extensively Drug-Resistant Shigellosis Evaluating and Supporting Children and Adolescents Presenting with Post-COVID Conditions Updates to COVID-19 Testing and Treatment for the Current SARS-CoV-2 Variants 2022 Calls/Webinarsplus icon Ebola: Clinical Presentation, Evaluation, and Infection Prevention COVID-19 Update: Clinical Guidance and Patient Education for Bivalent COVID-19 Vaccines Updates on Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C): Epidemiology, Case Definition, and COVID-19 Vaccination New 2022 CDC Clinical Practice Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Pain 2022-2023 Seasonal Influenza Testing and Treatment During the COVID-19 Pandemic Update on Monkeypox in Children, Adolescents, and People Who are Pregnant or Breastfeeding Melioidosis in the United States: What Clinicians Need to Know Following Newly Discovered Endemicity Update on 2022 Ebola Outbreak in Uganda Situational Update for Clinicians about Severe Monkeypox Virus Infections What Clinicians Need to Know about Dengue in the United States Evaluating and Supporting Patients Presenting with Cardiovascular Symptoms Following COVID 2022â2023 Recommendations for Influenza Prevention and Treatment in Children: An Update for Pediatric Providers Recommendations for Bivalent COVID-19 Booster Doses in People Ages 12 Years and Older 2022-2023 Influenza Vaccination Recommendations and Guidance on Coadministration with COVID-19 Vaccines Polio in New York: How to Recognize and Report Polio, and Reinforce Routine Childhood Polio Vaccination CDC and FDA Update: Interim Clinical Considerations for Monkeypox Vaccination Recommendations for the Novavax COVID-19 Vaccine Primary Series in Adults Ages 18 Years and Older Monkeypox Outbreak: Updates on the Epidemiology, Testing, Treatment, and Vaccination Monkeypox: Updates about Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment Recommendations for Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine Primary Series in Children 6 Months through 5 Years Old What Clinicians Need to Know About Available Therapeutic Options for COVID-19 What Clinicians Need to Know about Monkeypox in the United States and Other Countries Clinical Recommendations for Adenovirus Testing and Reporting of Children with Acute Hepatitis of Unknown Etiology Evaluating and Supporting Patients Presenting with Cognitive Symptoms Following COVID Updated Guidance for Clinicians on COVID-19 Vaccines COVID-19 Updates: What Clinicians Need to Know About Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Updates to CDCâs COVID-19 Quarantine and Isolation Guidelines in Healthcare and Non-healthcare Settings What Clinicians Need to Know About the New Oral Antiviral Medications for COVID-19 Continuing Education for COCA Calls/Webinars Training Resources Join the COCA Mailing List email_03Get Email Updates Sign up to receive COCA announcements and other COCA resources by entering your email address: Email Address What's this? Submit Connect with COCA Social_round_govd govD E-Mail Updates Social_round_rss RSS RSS Feed About CDC Contact Us 800-232-4636 Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat CONTACT CDC Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Email Us ABOUT CDC About CDC Jobs Funding POLICIES Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA OIG Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications CONNECT WITH US Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat Email LANGUAGES EspaÃ±ol ç¹é«ä¸­æ Tiáº¿ng Viá»t íêµ­ì´ Tagalog Ð ÑÑÑÐºÐ¸Ð¹ Ø§ÙØ¹Ø±Ø¨ÙØ© KreyÃ²l Ayisyen FranÃ§ais Polski PortuguÃªs Italiano Deutsch æ¥æ¬èª ÙØ§Ø±Ø³Û English U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA Nondiscrimination OIG Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications USA.gov SAS statsLicensed H5N1 vaccines generate cross-neutralizing antibodies against highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b influenza virus | Nature Medicine Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature medicine brief communications article Brief Communication Published: 16 July 2024 Licensed H5N1 vaccines generate cross-neutralizing antibodies against highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b influenza virus Surender Khurana ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0593-79651, Lisa R. King1, Jody Manischewitz1, Olivia Posadas1, Ashish K. Mishra1, Dongxiao Liu ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9656-89761, John H. Beigel ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4879-49412, Rino Rappuoli ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8827-254X3, John S. Tsang ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3186-30474,5 nAff6 & …Hana Golding1 Show authors Nature Medicine volume 30, pages 2771–2776 (2024)Cite this article 3479 Accesses 3 Citations 104 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Inactivated vaccinesInfluenza virus AbstractThe emergence of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses and their transmission to dairy cattle and animals, including humans, poses a major global public health threat. Therefore, the development of effective vaccines and therapeutics against H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus is considered a public health priority. In the United States, three H5N1 vaccines derived from earlier strains of HPAI H5N1 (A/Vietnam, clade 1, and A/Indonesia, clade 2.1) virus, with (MF59 or AS03) or without adjuvants, are licensed and stockpiled for pre-pandemic preparedness, but whether they can elicit neutralizing antibodies against circulating H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses is unknown. In this study, we evaluated the binding, hemagglutination inhibition and neutralizing antibody response generated after vaccination of adults with the three licensed vaccines. Individuals vaccinated with the two adjuvanted licensed H5N1 vaccines generated cross-reactive binding and cross-neutralizing antibodies against the HPAI clade 2.3.4.4b A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 virus. Seroconversion rates of 60–95% against H5 clade 2.3.4.4b were observed after two doses of AS03-adjuvanted-A/Indonesia or three doses of MF59-adjuvanted-A/Vietnam vaccine. These findings suggest that the stockpiled US-licensed adjuvanted H5N1 vaccines generate cross-neutralizing antibodies against circulating HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b in humans and may be useful as bridging vaccines until updated H5N1 vaccines become available. Access through your institution Buy or subscribe This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.com Buy this article Purchase on SpringerLink Instant access to full article PDF Buy now Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Fig. 1: Study design of adults after vaccination with either licensed unadjuvanted, MF59-adjuvanted or AS03-adjuvanted H5N1 vaccine.Fig. 2: Antibody binding and HI titers after vaccination of adults with unadjuvanted H5N1 or with oil-in water adjuvanted (MF59 or AS03 adjuvants) vaccines against H5N1 vaccine strains and H5 clade 2.3.4.4b virus. Similar content being viewed by others Adjuvanted recombinant hemagglutinin H7 vaccine to highly pathogenic influenza A(H7N9) elicits high and sustained antibody responses in healthy adults Article Open access 19 March 2021 AS03-adjuvanted H7N9 inactivated split virion vaccines induce cross-reactive and protective responses in ferrets Article Open access 19 March 2021 Highly pathogenic avian influenza A/Guangdong/17SF003/2016 is immunogenic and induces cross-protection against antigenically divergent H7N9 viruses Article Open access 26 February 2021 Data availability All data are shown in the manuscript figures and the extended data file. The structures of HA for H5N1-A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (PDB identifier 2IBX) or H5N1 A/Indonesia/5/2005 (PDB identifier 4K62) viruses were obtained from the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Data Bank (https://www.rcsb.org/). Source data are provided with this paper. Code availability No custom codes were used in this study. ReferencesAbbasi, J. Bird flu outbreak in dairy cows is widespread, raising public health concerns. JAMA 331, 1789–1791 (2024).Burrough, E. R. et al. Highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus infection in domestic dairy cattle and cats, United States, 2024. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 30, 1335–1343 (2024).Article PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Cohen, J. Worries about bird flu in U.S. cattle intensify. Science 384, 12–13 (2024).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Uyeki, T. M. et al. Highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection in a dairy farm worker. N. Engl. J. Med. 390, 2028–2089 (2024).Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC A(H5N1) Bird Flu Response Update June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/bird-flu/spotlights/h5n1-response-06282024.html#:~:text=CDC%20Update,animals%20in%20the%20United%20States (2024).Youk, S. et al. H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza clade 2.3.4.4b in wild and domestic birds: introductions into the United States and reassortments, December 2021–April 2022. Virology 587, 109860 (2023).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Kozlov, M. & Mallapaty, S. Bird flu outbreak in US cows: why scientists are concerned. Nature 628, 484–485 (2024).Article PubMed Google Scholar US Food and Drug Administration. Ongoing work to ensure continued effectiveness of the federal–state milk safety system. Updates on Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI). https://www.fda.gov/food/alerts-advisories-safety-information/updates-highly-pathogenic-avian-influenza-hpai (2024).Pyankova, O. G. et al. Isolation of clade 2.3.4.4b A(H5N8), a highly pathogenic avian influenza virus, from a worker during an outbreak on a poultry farm, Russia, December 2020. Eur. Surveill. 26, 2100439 (2021).Article CAS Google Scholar Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC A(H5N1) Bird Flu Response Update May 3, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/bird-flu/spotlights/avian-situation-update-05032024.html (2024).Garg, S. et al. Outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) viruses in U.S. dairy cattle and detection of two human cases—United States, 2024. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 73, 501–505 (2024).Article PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Beigel, J. H., Voell, J., Huang, C. Y., Burbelo, P. D. & Lane, H. C. Safety and immunogenicity of multiple and higher doses of an inactivated influenza A/H5N1 vaccine. J. Infect. Dis. 200, 501–508 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Treanor, J. J., Campbell, J. D., Zangwill, K. M., Rowe, T. & Wolff, M. Safety and immunogenicity of an inactivated subvirion influenza A (H5N1) vaccine. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 1343–1351 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Galli, G. et al. Adjuvanted H5N1 vaccine induces early CD4+ T cell response that predicts long-term persistence of protective antibody levels. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 3877–3882 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Khurana, S. et al. Vaccines with MF59 adjuvant expand the antibody repertoire to target protective sites of pandemic avian H5N1 influenza virus. Sci. Transl. Med. 2, 15ra15 (2010).Article Google Scholar Khurana, S. et al. MF59 adjuvant enhances diversity and affinity of antibody-mediated immune response to pandemic influenza vaccines. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 85ra48 (2011).Article PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Khurana, S. et al. AS03-adjuvanted H5N1 vaccine promotes antibody diversity and affinity maturation, NAI titers, cross-clade H5N1 neutralization, but not H1N1 cross-subtype neutralization. NPJ Vaccines 3, 40 (2018).Article PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Laurie, K. L. et al. International laboratory comparison of influenza microneutralization assays for A(H1N1)pdm09, A(H3N2), and A(H5N1) influenza viruses by CONSISE. Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 22, 957–964 (2015).Article CAS Google Scholar Waldock, J. et al. Haemagglutination inhibition and virus microneutralisation serology assays: use of harmonised protocols and biological standards in seasonal influenza serology testing and their impact on inter-laboratory variation and assay correlation: a FLUCOP collaborative study. Front. Immunol. 14, 1155552 (2023).Article CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Galli, G. et al. Fast rise of broadly cross-reactive antibodies after boosting long-lived human memory B cells primed by an MF59 adjuvanted prepandemic vaccine. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 7962–7967 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Mule, M. P. et al. Integrating population and single-cell variations in vaccine responses identifies a naturally adjuvanted human immune setpoint. Immunity 57, 1160–1176 (2024).Goll, J. B. et al. The antibody landscapes following AS03 and MF59 adjuvanted H5N1 vaccination. NPJ Vaccines 7, 103 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Potter, C. W. & Oxford, J. S. Determinants of immunity to influenza infection in man. Br. Med. Bull. 35, 69–75 (1979).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Khurana, S. et al. Bacterial HA1 vaccine against pandemic H5N1 influenza virus: evidence of oligomerization, hemagglutination, and cross-protective immunity in ferrets. J. Virol. 85, 1246–1256 (2010).Article PubMed Central PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank M. Zaitseva, K. Peden and B. Golding for their insightful review of the manuscript.The antibody characterization work described in this manuscript was supported by FDA (Office of Counterterrorism and Emerging Threats (OCET)–Medical Countermeasures initiative (MCMi)) OCET 2023-0229 to S.K. and H.G. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the US Department of Health and Human Services nor does mention of trade names, commercial products or organizations imply endorsement by the US Government. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions and recommendations are those of the authors and are not necessarily endorsed by the US Government.Author informationAuthor notesJohn S. TsangPresent address: Departments of Immunobiology and Biomedical Engineering, Yale Center for Systems and Engineering Immunology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USAAuthors and AffiliationsDivision of Viral Products, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USASurender Khurana, Lisa R. King, Jody Manischewitz, Olivia Posadas, Ashish K. Mishra, Dongxiao Liu & Hana GoldingNational Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAJohn H. BeigelFondazione Biotecnopolo di Siena, Siena, ItalyRino RappuoliMultiscale Systems Biology Section, Laboratory of Immune System Biology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAJohn S. TsangNIH Center for Human Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USAJohn S. TsangAuthorsSurender KhuranaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLisa R. KingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJody ManischewitzView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarOlivia PosadasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAshish K. MishraView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDongxiao LiuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn H. BeigelView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRino RappuoliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJohn S. TsangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHana GoldingView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsDesigned research: S.K. and H.G. Performed research: L.R.K., J.M., O.P., A.K.M., D.L. and S.K. Human clinical samples: J.H.B., R.R. and J.S.T. Contributed to writing: S.K. and H.G.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Surender Khurana.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Medicine thanks Richard Webby and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: Alison Farrell, in collaboration with the Nature Medicine team. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Extended dataExtended Data Fig. 1 Hemagglutinin (HA) amino acid sequence alignment of H5 strains.Sequence alignment of HA0 amino acid sequence from H5N1 vaccine strains: A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (clade 1), A/Indonesia/5/2005 (clade 2.1), and H5N8 Astrakhan/3212/2020 (clade 2.3.4.4b). The globular head domain (HA1; in blue) and stem domain (HA2; in red) sequences in HA0 are displayed in blue and red lines, respectively. Identities and similarities in alignment sequence are depicted in dot plot and colors.Extended Data Fig. 2 Neutralization titers following vaccination of adults with H5N1 with and without MF59 or AS03 adjuvant against H5N1 vaccine strains and H5 clade 2.3.4.4b strain.(a) Endpoint microneutralization (MN) titers of the 12 adults at day 56 (28-days post-second vaccination) are shown for unadjuvanted group against A/Vietnam/1194/2004 vaccine strain and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 (clade 2.3.4.4b) strain. (b) MN titers of 24 adults vaccinated thrice with A/Vietnam/1194/2004 in the absence (n = 4; in open red symbols; 15 mcg/dose) or three doses (21 days post-vaccination) in presence (n = 20; in filled symbols; 7.5 mcg/dose) of MF59 adjuvant, against H5N1 A/Vietnam/1194/2004 vaccine strain and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 (clade 2.3.4.4b) strain. (c) MN titers of the 30 vaccinees at day 42 (21-days post-second vaccination) are shown for AS03-adjuvanted group (n = 22; in blue filled symbols) and unadjuvanted group (n = 8; in open blue symbols) against H5N1 A/Indonesia/5/2005 vaccine strain and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 (clade 2.3.4.4b) virus. Geometric means are shown as central line with the whiskers indicate 95% confidence interval. Geometric mean titer (GMT) values are shown above for each of the groups. The percent seroconversion rate (SCR %) for each group was calculated as number of seropositive samples (titers >1:60) divided by total number of samples x 100 in the group. The samples that did not neutralize influenza virus at 1:20 serum dilution was given a MN titer value of 10 for graphical representation and statistical analysis. All neutralization experiments were performed in triplicates and the researchers performing the assay were blinded to sample identity. All neutralization experiments were performed at least twice and variations for duplicate runs were less than 2-fold. Statistical differences of endpoint neutralization titers between groups were analyzed by ANOVA using Kruskal-Wallis test for multiple comparisons calculated in GraphPad Prism (9.3.1 version). Only statistically significant differences with p values (<0.05) are shown. For paired comparison between the H5N1 vaccine and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 strain within each sample cohort, the statistical analysis was performed using the paired t-test. To ensure robustness of the results, absolute measurements were log2-transformed before performing the analysis.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 3 IgG binding of post-H5N1 vaccination human sera to HA1 globular domains of H5N1 strains.IgG titers of the 11 adults at day 56 (28-days post-second vaccination) are shown for unadjuvanted (90 mcg/dose) vaccine recipients (A); 24 adults vaccinated with three doses of (21 days post-vaccination) A/Vietnam/1194/2004 in the absence (n = 4; in open red symbols; 15 mcg/dose) or two or three doses of (21 days post-vaccination) in presence (n = 20; in filled symbols; 7.5 mcg/dose) of MF59 adjuvant (B) against globular HA1 head domain of homologous H5N1 A/Vietnam/1194/2004 vaccine strain and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 (clade 2.3.4.4b) strain were measured using ELISA. Binding of the IgG antibodies to the immobilized HA1 protein is shown as area under curve values. (C) IgG titers for 30 vaccinees at day 42 (21-days post-second vaccination) are shown for AS03-adjuvanted group (n = 22; in blue filled symbols) and unadjuvanted group (n = 8; in open blue symbols) against HA1 globular domain of homologous H5N1 A/Indonesia/5/2005 vaccine strain and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 strain. Geometric means are shown as central line with the whiskers indicate 95% confidence interval. Geometric mean titer (GMT) values are shown above for each of the groups. Statistical differences of IgG titers between groups were analyzed by ANOVA using Kruskal-Wallis test for multiple comparisons calculated in GraphPad Prism (9.3.1 version). Only statistically significant differences with p values (<0.05) are shown. For paired comparison between the H5N1 vaccine and A/Astrakhan/3212/2020 strain within each sample cohort, the statistical analysis was performed using the paired t-test. To ensure robustness of the results, absolute measurements were log2-transformed before performing the analysis.Source dataExtended Data Table 1 Distribution of the number of individuals in unadjuvanted versus adjuvanted cohorts in the three vaccine clinical trialsFull size tableSupplementary informationReporting SummarySource dataSource Data Fig. 2Statistical source data for Fig. 2.Source Data Extended Data Fig./Table 2Statistical source data for Extended Data Fig. 2.Source Data Extended Data Fig./Table 3Statistical source data for Extended Data Fig. 3.Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKhurana, S., King, L.R., Manischewitz, J. et al. Licensed H5N1 vaccines generate cross-neutralizing antibodies against highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b influenza virus. Nat Med 30, 2771–2776 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-03189-yDownload citationReceived: 11 June 2024Accepted: 11 July 2024Published: 16 July 2024Issue Date: October 2024DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-03189-yShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative This article is cited by The practical longevity of stockpiled A(H5N1) influenza vaccine Richard J. Webby Nature Medicine (2024) Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Associated content The practical longevity of stockpiled A(H5N1) influenza vaccine Richard J. Webby Nature Medicine News & Views 26 Sept 2024 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Podcasts Current issue Collections Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Statistical Advisory Panel Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Web Feeds Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Medicine (Nat Med) ISSN 1546-170X (online) ISSN 1078-8956 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingQ&A: Will H5N1 avian influenza evolve to become more dangerous to humans? | Penn State UniversityPenn StateResearchQ&A: Will H5N1 avian influenza evolve to become more dangerous to humans? A Penn State researcher explains what scientists are watching out for to avoid a pandemic H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza was first detected in dairy cattle in Texas on March 25 and has since spread to several additional states. Researchers, including those at Penn State, are monitoring the situation and conducting studies with a goal of protecting human and animal health. Credit: madisonwi/Getty Images. All Rights Reserved.ExpandJuly 19, 2024By Sara LaJeunesseUNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. — H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) was first detected in dairy cattle in Texas on March 25 and has since spread to several additional states. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has confirmed multiple human infections in which the individuals were exposed to infected dairy cattle. The third case, detected in May, was a farm worker who was the only individual so far to exhibit respiratory symptoms. Although the virus has been detected in the commercial milk supply, pasteurization successfully kills the virus, and the CDC said the current risk to the general public from bird flu viruses to be low. Penn State News spoke with Ruth Nissly, assistant research professor of veterinary and biomedical sciences, to learn more about how scientists are monitoring the H5N1 virus. Q: How is the H5N1 avian influenza virus related to other influenza viruses? Nissly: H5N1 avian influenza is a subtype of the influenza A viruses, which also include human influenza virus in people, canine influenza virus in dogs, swine influenza virus in pigs, avian influenza virus in birds and many more. Influenza viruses that are adapted to specific animals have a harder time infecting other animal species than they do infecting another member of the same animal species. For example, while it is possible for a sick human to pass influenza virus to their pet cat, it is more likely that it would spread to their human household members or coworkers. These “types” of influenza virus are somewhat like different breeds of dog — they are all distantly related to one another, but each has distinguishing features in their genomes. In addition to each organism-specific influenza type, there are multiple combinations of the proteins that are on the outer surface of the virus, which are abbreviated HA and NA, or just H and N. Avian influenza has many combinations of Hs and Ns, most of which only cause mild disease in certain birds. Some of the Hs contain a protein feature that causes viral infection of birds to be more severe; these are the highly pathogenic viruses. The H5N1 avian influenza virus responsible for causing disease in dairy cattle earlier this year is the same virus that has been circulating in wild waterfowl, such as ducks and geese, in North America since late 2021. The virus entered North America after having been in migrating birds in Europe for many years before that. Once in North America, the European H5N1 started mixing with low pathogenicity avian influenza viruses that existed naturally in North American birds. This means it has a lot of chances to acquire versions of other viral genes that can impact its ability to infect non-avian species. This has resulted in some H5N1 viruses that infect non-avian species, including foxes and skunks, and can cause severe disease in these mammals. The H5N1 version detected in dairy cows was also found in birds, cats, mice and other wild animals near the dairy farms. Q: Are there other influenza strains out there that could be dangerous to humans? Nissly: While it’s easy to be concerned about H5N1 HPAI, the seasonal flu strains that people tend to get in the winter months also are dangerous. The CDC estimates an average of over 30,000 people die from seasonal flu, and 10 times more have serious infections that lead to hospitalization. Q: What are scientists looking for that might indicate that H5N1 is becoming more dangerous to humans? Nissly: In general, scientists are looking at genome sequences of the viruses that have been found, seeking specific changes in certain viral proteins that are known from years of study to alter the ability of virus to bind to or enter cells. Fortunately, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and other agencies have done a lot of work over the past several years to make it easier and faster to sequence genomes, so a broader range of scientists can explore the impacts of the changes on the virus’s ability to infect hosts and replicate. Q: If the virus does evolve the ability to transmit in humans, who would be most at risk? Nissly: The people who are most likely to be at risk include those who are unvaccinated against seasonal influenza; those with underlying medical conditions that increase their susceptibility to respiratory infections; and certainly anyone working in close contact with affected animals or individuals and who are not using personal protective equipment like face shields, safety glasses and gloves. Q: What factors could prevent H5N1 from causing a pandemic? Nissly: In general, the less a virus is able to multiply in a population, the less likely it will mutate and become better able to infect. For the cow situation, there are state-level and federal-level coordination efforts to set up bulk tank milk monitoring programs that allow farmers to more easily move cows without additional testing and presumably enable early detection of infection in a herd. That’s a win-win for the farmers, in my opinion, because it is a huge cost if the animals get sick, including needing to divert many workers to palliative care of the unwell animals. If an infection can be caught early before clinical signs are present, it’s more likely to be controllable and not spread throughout the whole herd. Pennsylvania has its own monitoring program in place, too. If Pennsylvania farmers are interested in participating in this, they can call 717-307-3259 and/or email RA-ahds@pa.gov. They can also just complete the interest form and email it directly to RA-ahds@pa.gov. Similar programs happen in the poultry industry, helping to reduce the overall risk to not only animals but humans, as well. Q: What research is being done on H5N1? Nissly: Here at Penn State, several research efforts are underway. Though not H5N1-specific, the Penn State wastewater testing team has been monitoring levels of flu since 2021. My lab is monitoring milk sold in Pennsylvania stores for the presence of viral genetic material and antibodies. Antibodies can indicate that at some time in the past cows were exposed to the virus. We are also conducting infection studies on in vitro models that simulate the respiratory tracts of cattle and the cells from cow udders that produce milk. By studying the existing H5N1 and other strains of flu using these models, we aim to determine whether the newer strains like H5N1 have a different impact in cows than the other strains — and if they do, what it is about those strains that makes them more harmful. Outside of Penn State, researchers are also examining how well H5N1 remains infectious on different surfaces that are unique to the dairy industry, such as the automatic milking equipment, and how effective heat treatment — which is similar to pasteurization — of milk is at rendering virus noninfectious. Some groups are performing controlled, experimental infections of cows to get a detailed look at what happens. These types of studies complement recently released studies that show which tissues and cell types in the affected cows at impacted farms had virus in them. Q: Are scientists continuing to monitor wild animals for the virus? Nissly: The USDA continues to monitor animals around the affected farms. Recently they reported that, in addition to cats, house mice at farms tested positive for avian influenza. These types of investigations at infected premises have historically been extremely challenging from a regulatory standpoint because it required getting federal permission to move material away from the farm. The federal government’s pause on select agent [biological agents that have the potential to pose a severe threat to public health and safety] status of HPAI makes such investigations possible — which will go a long way in helping to answer long-standing questions about how the virus gets onto farms in the first place. Even before the outbreak in cows, my lab was planning studies to understand the potential for wild mice to carry avian influenza viruses — those are scheduled to start in late August. We had planned to test mice at non-infected farms, but now we should have the option to pursue testing at infected farms, too. Others at Penn State are also investigating wild animals. Kurt Vandegrift is working with the USDA to see how he can make use of samples from SARS-CoV-2 surveillance to understand HPAI exposure in wild animals. Justin Brown recently published a study about antibodies in canines, including hunting dogs who retrieve ducks or other birds that might have HPAI. Last Updated July 19, 2024Contactsdl13@psu.eduCell Phone: 814-777-3833TagsResearchHealth and MedicineStudentsVisitors and NeighborsFaculty and StaffBusiness and IndustryAlumniUniversity ParkAgricultural SciencesDepartment of Veterinary and Biomedical SciencesHuck Institutes of the Life SciencesCenter for Infectious Disease DynamicsLatest NewsGet the news by emailSubscribeFacebookTwitterLinkedinInstagramGet News By EmailDiscover NewsExploreNewsCareersFacts and RankingsCollegesCampusesHealth CareResearchImpactResourcesProspective StudentsCurrent StudentsInternational StudentsBusiness and IndustryVeterans and MilitaryVisitorsFaculty and StaffAlumniMediaCOVID-19 InformationPopular LinksMapsDirectoryLibrariesAcademic CalendarLionPATHStay ConnectedEmails / HeadlinesEmergency NotificationsPenn State GoStrategic CommunicationsReport MisconductPolice201 Old Main, University Park, PA 16802814-865-4700Contact UsNon DiscriminationEqual OpportunityAccessibilityLegal StatementsThe Pennsylvania State UniversityThe Pennsylvania State University © 2024AMA announces CPT update for avian influenza vaccines | American Medical Association Skip to main content Explore AMA Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Delivering Care Delivering Care Coronavirus AMA Guides® Health Equity Public Health Physician-Patient Relationship Overdose Epidemic Hypertension Diabetes Population Care Precision Medicine Ethics Health equity in organized medicine survey reports The Health Equity in Organized Medicine (HEIOM) survey collects data on efforts by stateerritorial and specialty medical associations to advance health equity. Hurricane recovery in Florida, the IV fluid shortage and health care emergency preparedness The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about health care emergency preparedness. Practice Management Practice Management AMA STEPS Forward® AMA Store Practice Transformation CPT® Prior Authorization Reducing Administrative Burden Scope of Practice Sustainability Physician Health Claims Processing Private Practices Payment & Delivery Models Medicare & Medicaid Digital HIPAA Career Development Pearl of the Week: Reduce the documentation burden Find resources on outpatient documentation and coding. CPT errata & technical corrections Download PDFs to see the latest corrections to the published AMA CPT code books. Education Education AMA PRA Credit System Improve GME GME Funding Medical School Diversity ChangeMedEd Initiative International Medical Education Challenges with Matching for international medical graduates and how IMGs help residency programs The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about the Match rate for IMGs and more. Challenges with Matching for international medical graduates and how IMGs help residency programs [Podcast] The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about the Match rate for IMGs and more. Medical Students Medical Students Preparing for Medical School USMLE® Step 1 & 2 Medical School Life Medical Student Health Medical Student Finance Clinical Rotations Publishing Research Medical Student Advocacy Specialty Profiles Preparing for Residency AMA members can now save up to $80 off UWorld QBanks USMLE Steps 1–3, COMLEX Levels 1–2, ABIM and ABFM board exam prep are part of the special offer that ends Nov. 30. Learn more. What it's like in allergy and immunology: Shadowing Dr. Fraser AMA member Burcin Fraser, MD, of Privia Health, says that—depending on the setting— the work-life balance in allergy and immunology can be a big draw. Medical Residents Medical Residents Residency Life Research During Residency Medical Fellowships Medical Resident Wellness Medical Resident Advocacy Medical Residency Personal Finance USMLE® Step 3 Transition from Resident to Attending Holidays at the hospital during GME—6 tips to make the most of it Resident physicians often spend end-of-year holidays away from home, but interactions with peers and patients offer opportunities to find merriment. It matters how your practice is paid. A primer for young doctors. You need a job, and there are many different payment models prevalent. Learn which can work best for you. Health Care Advocacy Health Care Advocacy Advocating for Public Health Access to Care Administrative Burdens Payment Reform Advocacy Update Federal Advocacy State Advocacy Judicial Advocacy AMA advocacy efforts The AMA advocates at the federal and state levels on key health care issues impacting patients and physicians. Download the PDF updates of the AMA's impact. AMA advocacy events Collaborating and networking to advocate for patients and the medical profession. Member Benefits Member Benefits Personal Member Benefits & Discounts Practice Benefits & Discounts Member Eligibility & Dues Events CME Opportunities ChangeMedEd® 2025 ChangeMedEd® is a national conference that brings together leaders and innovators to accelerate change in medical education across the continuum. Learn more. Learning Collaborative: Augmented Intelligence (AI) Governance Build a framework for the implementation of AI in practice during this seven-month shared learning collaborative launching April 2025. Organization Board of Trustees House of Delegates House of Delegates HOD Organization AMA Policies Annual Meeting Interim Meeting AMA Elections Business of the AMA House of Delegates Interim Meeting Download PDFs and access information submitted for consideration at the AMA House of Delegates Interim Meeting. Highlights from the 2024 AMA Interim Meeting Track the news and key moments from the AMA House of Delegates’ meeting, which runs Nov. 8–12. Councils Councils Council on Constitution & Bylaws Council on Ethical & Judicial Affairs Council on Legislation Council on Long Range Planning & Development Council on Medical Education Council on Medical Service Council on Science & Public Health Medical education leadership opportunities Apply for a leadership position by submitting the required documentation by the deadline. General medical education: Council on Medical Education reports & issue briefs Download PDFs of reports on this topic from the Council on Medical Education presented during the AMA Interim and Annual Meetings. Member Groups (Sections) Member Groups (Sections) Section Meetings Academic Physicians LGBTQ+ Section Integrated Physician Practices International Medical Graduates Medical Students Minority Affairs Organized Medical Staff Private Practice Physicians Residents & Fellows Senior Physicians Women Physicians Young Physicians 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting highlights Read highlights from the 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting. 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting agenda & resources Find the agenda PDF, documents and more for the 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting on Nov. 8 at the Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin Resort, Orlando, Florida. About About AMA Center for Health Equity Board of Trustees Leadership Foundation Office of International Relations CPT® Editorial Panel RVS Update Committee (RUC) United States Adopted Names Publications & Newsletters Research AMA History Awards AMA Career Opportunities Physician Professional Data™ CPT® Editorial Panel Meeting Process Calendar Find a calendar listing the upcoming meetings of the CPT Editorial Panel. RVS Update Committee (RUC) Understand the role the AMA/Specialty Society RUC plays in providing physicians a voice in shaping Medicare relative values. Explore Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Join Renew Join / Renew Popular SearchesMedicare reformFree CME for membersBurnout by specialtyDEA training requirementJoy in Medicine program Member Benefits Sign In Sign In To Enjoy Your AMA Benefits Sign In Become a Member Create Free Account My Subscriptions My Topics My Bookmarks Press Releases AMA announces CPT update for avian influenza vaccines Bookmark Jul 19, 2024 CHICAGO — The American Medical Association (AMA) today announced an editorial update to Current Procedural Terminology (CPT®), the leading medical terminology code set for describing health care procedures and services, that includes a newly assigned provisional CPT code for vaccines to protect patients against the H5N8 strain of avian influenza (bird flu).The provisional CPT code is effective for use on the condition the H5N8 Influenza virus vaccine candidates receive emergency use authorization from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The AMA is publishing the CPT code update now to ensure electronic systems across the U.S. health care system are prepared in advance for the potential FDA authorization.“The new CPT code is a vital preparatory step in response to the potential danger to humans from a highly infectious avian influenza disease,” said AMA President Bruce A. Scott, M.D. “A CPT code that clinically distinguishes the avian influenza vaccine allows for data-driven tracking, reporting and analysis that supports planning, preparedness, and allocation of vaccines in case a public health response is needed for avian flu prevention.”For quick reference, the new product code assigned to H5N8 influenza virus vaccines is:90695 Influenza virus vaccine, H5N8, derived from cell cultures, adjuvanted for intramuscular useThe new CPT code for H5N8 influenza virus vaccines should be used with one of the following administration codes to report the work counseling patients or caregivers, administering the vaccine, and updating the medical record.For children (through 18 years of age) the administration codes are:90460 Immunization administration through 18 years of age via any route of administration, with counseling by physician or other qualified health care professional; first or only component of each vaccine or toxoid administered90461 Immunization administration through 18 years of age via any route of administration, with counseling by physician or other qualified health care professional; each additional vaccine or toxoid component administeredFor adults the administration codes are:90471 Immunization administration (includes percutaneous, intradermal, subcutaneous, or intramuscular injections); 1 vaccine (single or combination vaccineoxoid)90472 Immunization administration (includes percutaneous, intradermal, subcutaneous, or intramuscular injections); each additional vaccine (single or combination vaccineoxoid)Changes to the CPT code set are considered through an open editorial process managed by the CPT Editorial Panel that collects broad input from the health care community and beyond to ensure CPT content reflects the coding demands of digital health, precision medicine, augmented intelligence, and other aspects of a modern health care system. This rigorous editorial process keeps the CPT code set current with contemporary medical science and technology so it can fulfill its vital role as the trusted language of medicine today and the code to its future.# # #Questions on CPT coding and content should be directed to the CPT Network, the authoritative source for CPT coding answers. Media Contact: AMA Media & Editorial ph: (312) 464-4430 [email protected] About the American Medical Association The American Medical Association is the physicians’ powerful ally in patient care. As the only medical association that convenes 190+ state and specialty medical societies and other critical stakeholders, the AMA represents physicians with a unified voice to all key players in health care. The AMA leverages its strength by removing the obstacles that interfere with patient care, leading the charge to prevent chronic disease and confront public health crises and, driving the future of medicine to tackle the biggest challenges in health care. CPT® Codes Bird Flu Membership Moves Medicine™ Free access to JAMA Network™ and CME Save hundreds on insurance Fight for physicians and patient rights Join the AMA today FEATURED STORIES Nov 4, 2024 · 4 MIN READ Building consensus to fix prior auth at the state level Oct 31, 2024 · 5 MIN READ Time to crack down on ERISA plans’ use of prior authorization Oct 30, 2024 · 5 MIN READ 5 ways to optimize the patient portal and cut physician burdens Nov 4, 2024 · 6 MIN READ To attract new physicians, listen to the ones already on board Also of Interest:Category I Immunization CodesAvian flu coding & guidanceBird flu 2024: H5N1 virus news, recent measles... The AMA promotes the art and science of medicine and the betterment of public health. AMA Contact Us Download AMA Connect app for iPhone or Android AMA Careers Events Press Center AMA Alliance AMPAC AMA Foundation The best in medicine, delivered to your mailbox Please enter your email address. I verify that I’m in the U.S. and agree to receive communication from the AMA or third parties on behalf of AMA. Explore AMA Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Terms of Use Privacy Policy Code of Conduct Website Accessibility Copyright 1995 - 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.Tracking influenza in the nose - Boston Children's Answers ☰ Request an Appointment Get a Second Opinion Share Your Story Donate Close Home Research Patient Stories Parenting Clinical Care Our Community Request an Appointment Get a Second Opinion Share Your Story Donate Answers Your destination for kids' health Tracking influenza in its first battleground: The nose Posted on July 17, 2024 by Nancy Fliesler | Basic/Translational, ResearchTags: cellular and molecular medicine, flu, infectious diseases A dynamic ‘atlas’ of how multiple cell types in the nose respond to the flu could potentially lead to new targets and more effective nasal flu vaccines. (Image: Adobe Stock) The answer to curbing influenza could be right under our noses — or, more accurately, inside them. New research maps happenings in the nose during the course of influenza in exquisite detail, and could potentially lead to new targets and more effective nasal flu vaccines. The nose is often the gateway to respiratory infections, where viruses first set up shop and start replicating. But strangely, the immune response in the nose has been relatively unexplored. “The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute has traditionally covered the lung through the trachea, and another NIH institute funds research for craniofacial and dental disorders,” says Boston Children’s Hospital researcher José Ordovás-Montañés, PhD. “Where does the nose fit?” Ordovás-Montañés first took on this underfunded body part during the COVID-19 pandemic. His lab showed that people who developed severe COVID-19 had weak antiviral responses in the nose and throat. In new work led by Samuel Kazer, PhD, the team analyzed what happened in the noses of mice during flu infection. Unlike the COVID study, which analyzed patients’ nasal swabs at a single point in time, the new study tracked events throughout the nose, including parts not reachable with a nasal swab, throughout a flu episode. To better understand immune memory, the researchers resampled the mice after a second influenza infection. They published their findings last week in the journal Immunity. An ‘atlas’ of cell responses to flu Over the course of infection, the researchers sequenced the RNA of thousands of individual cells in the nasal mucosa (the tissue lining the nasal cavity) — in all, more than 150,000 readouts over two weeks. This created a dynamic “atlas,” cataloguing what kinds of cells were there and how each was responding. The team identified 127 cell types and subtypes, including the epithelial cells that line the mucosa, multiple types of immune cells, cells making up connective tissue, and even neurons that facilitate smell. “We saw lots of interesting cellular diversity within this micro-anatomy,” says Ordovás-Montañés. “When we sample people with swabs, we just scrape the surface. Sam was able to look at the full tissue.” Different cells came and went during influenza infection. For example, neutrophils (first-responder immune cells) appeared almost immediately, but left once the virus was cleared. Tissue-resident memory T cells (TRM cells), which maintain memory of an infection in the tissue, showed up around day 14. They remained in the nose thereafter, right through the second bout of flu, as did plasmablasts, which matured into antibody-producing plasma cells. Maintaining a memory of influenza One previously undescribed group of cells took the stage one to two weeks after the start of infection. Dubbed Krt13+ nasal immune-interacting floor epithelial cells (KNIIFE cells), they run along the bottom of the nasal cavity, just above the palate of the mouth. Kazer’s expertise at the intersection of biology and computational science made their discovery possible, says Ordovás-Montañés. “We almost threw those cells out because they looked so weird,” he adds. These cells may be key to the more rapid, coordinated immune responses the team saw during the second influenza infection. “KNIIFE cells express many genes associated with immune function that we’re not used to seeing in epithelial cells,” Kazer elaborates. “They expand after the virus is cleared, in the same anatomical location as the TRM cells. We think they may help maintain the memory of an infection.” Nosing around to create a vaccine The team is now further exploring the role of KNIIFE cells and plans to correlate the findings from mice with nasal-swab data from people with influenza and from children seen at Boston Children’s Hospital with other viral infections. Kazer hopes their work will one day lead to a long-lasting nasal vaccine that could limit the spread of disease beyond the nose by helping the nose “remember” the flu virus. “Memory can take place in many types of cells,” he says. “Understanding how memory looks in a barrier tissue like the nasal mucosa is some basic biology we’re trying to get at.” For regular science updates from Boston Children’s, subscribe to our research newsletter. Share this:Related Posts : Why do some people get severe COVID-19? The nose may know The body’s first encounter with SARS-CoV-2, the virus behind COVID-19, happens in the nose and throat, or nasopharynx. A ... A journey through the intestine during colitis, cell by cell Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), causing devastating abdominal pain, persistent diarrhea, and rectal bleeding, is hard to control with current treatments. ... Nanobodies from alpacas could steer immune attacks on influenza While conventional flu vaccines are designed to anticipate the influenza strains projected to dominate in the next flu season, they’... Boosting vaccines for the elderly with 'hyperactivators' As we age our immune systems start to flag, leaving us more susceptible to cancer and infections — and less responsive ... Tagged: cellular and molecular medicine, flu, infectious diseases Stay connected! Sign up for our weekly email newsletter for the latest parenting tips, patient stories, and news for your family from Boston Children's Subscribe now Connect With Boston Children’s Hospital 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115 617-355-6000 800-355-7944 How Can We HelpInternational Visitors Centers and Services Conditions + Treatments Find a Doctor Get a Second Opinion Locations AboutAbout Us Giving to Boston Children’s Newsroom Quality & Patient Safety LegalHIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices Patient & Family Rights Terms of Use Public PolicyStudy shows promise for a universal flu vaccine | OHSU News OHSU Home Link to OHSU Home News Menu Search OHSU Search Section Search all of OHSU Search News Search Text Search COVID-19 Stories Español Awards and Accomplishments Community COVID-19 Education Health Care Labor Relations Philanthropy Research Viewpoint Multimedia Photos Videos For News Media OHSU Facts Media guidelines Media kits Public Records Request Media Contacts OHSU Home Find a Doctor Donate Jobs Directions Contact Text Size A A A OHSU Home News Stories Study shows promise for a universal flu vaccine Browse Stories Español Awards and Accomplishments Community COVID-19 Education Health Care Labor Relations Philanthropy Research Viewpoint Social Media Facebook X YouTube LinkedIn Instagram RSS OHSU Social Hub E-mail Subscription Subscribe to e-mail updates Quick Links OHSU facts Media guidelines Media kits Public records request Share Tweet Share Email Print Study shows promise for a universal flu vaccine OHSU-led research uses innovative vaccine platform to target interior of virus; scientists validate theory using 1918 flu virus By Erik Robinson July 19, 2024 Portland, Oregon Lea esta página en español Jonah Sacha, Ph.D., senior co-author of a study published today in the journal Nature Communications, says new research could lead to a universal influenza vaccine withing five years. (OHSU/Christine Torres Hicks) New research led by Oregon Health & Science University reveals a promising approach to developing a universal influenza vaccine — a so-called “one and done” vaccine that confers lifetime immunity against an evolving virus. The study, published today in the journal Nature Communications, tested an OHSU-developed vaccine platform against the virus considered most likely to trigger the next pandemic. Researchers reported the vaccine generated a robust immune response in nonhuman primates that were exposed to the avian H5N1 influenza virus. But the vaccine wasn’t based on the contemporary H5N1 virus; instead, the primates were inoculated against the influenza virus of 1918 that killed millions of people worldwide. Jonah Sacha, Ph.D. (OHSU) “It’s exciting because in most cases, this kind of basic science research advances the science very gradually; in 20 years, it might become something,” said senior author Jonah Sacha, Ph.D., professor and chief of the Division of Pathobiology at OHSU’s Oregon National Primate Research Center. “This could actually become a vaccine in five years or less.” Researchers reported that six of 11 nonhuman primates inoculated against the virus that circulated a century ago — the 1918 flu — survived exposure to one of the deadliest viruses in the world today, H5N1. In contrast, a control group of six unvaccinated primates exposed to the H5N1 virus succumbed to the disease. Sacha said he believes the platform “absolutely” could be useful against other mutating viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. “It’s a very viable approach,” he said. “For viruses of pandemic potential, it’s critical to have something like this. We set out to test influenza, but we don’t know what’s going to come next.” A senior co-author from the University of Pittsburgh concurred. “Should a deadly virus such as H5N1 infect a human and ignite a pandemic, we need to quickly validate and deploy a new vaccine,” said co-corresponding author Douglas Reed, Ph.D., associate professor of immunology at the University of Pittsburgh Center for Vaccine Research. Finding a stationary target This approach harnesses a vaccine platform previously developed by scientists at OHSU to fight HIV and tuberculosis, and in fact is already being used in a clinical trial against HIV. The method involves inserting small pieces of target pathogens into the common herpes virus cytomegalovirus, or CMV, which infects most people in their lifetimes and typically produces mild or no symptoms. The virus acts as a vector specifically designed to induce an immune response from the body’s own T cells. This approach differs from common vaccines — including the existing flu vaccines — which are designed to induce an antibody response that targets the most recent evolution of the virus, distinguished by the arrangement of proteins covering the exterior surface. “The problem with influenza is that it’s not just one virus,” Sacha said. “Like the SARS-CoV-2 virus, it’s always evolving the next variant and we’re always left to chase where the virus was, not where it’s going to be.” The spike proteins on the virus exterior surface evolve to elude antibodies. In the case of flu, vaccines are updated regularly using a best estimate of the next evolution of the virus. Sometimes it’s accurate, sometimes less so. In contrast, a specific type of T cell in the lungs, known as effector memory T cell, targets the internal structural proteins of the virus, rather than its continually mutating outer envelope. This internal structure doesn’t change much over time — presenting a stationary target for T cells to search out and destroy any cells infected by an old or newly evolved influenza virus. Success with a century-old template To test their T cell theory, researchers designed a CMV-based vaccine using the 1918 influenza virus as a template. Working within a highly secure biosafety level 3 laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh, they exposed the vaccinated nonhuman primates to small particle aerosols containing the avian H5N1 influenza virus — an especially severe virus that is currently circulating among dairy cows in the United States. Remarkably, six of the 11 vaccinated primates survived the exposure, despite the century-long period of virus evolution. “It worked because the interior protein of the virus was so well preserved,” Sacha said. “So much so, that even after almost 100 years of evolution, the virus can’t change those critically important parts of itself.” The study raises the potential for developing a protective vaccine against H5N1 in people. “Inhalation of aerosolized H5N1 influenza virus causes a cascade of events that can trigger respiratory failure,” said co-senior author Simon Barratt-Boyes, Ph.D., professor of infectious diseases, microbiology and immunology at Pitt. “The immunity induced by the vaccine was sufficient to limit virus infection and lung damage, protecting the monkeys from this very serious infection.” By synthesizing more up-to-date virus templates, the new study suggests CMV vaccines may be able to generate an effective, long-lasting immune response against a wide suite of new variants. “I think it means within five to 10 years, a one-and-done shot for influenza is realistic,” Sacha said. The same CMV platform developed by OHSU researchers has advanced to a clinical trial to protect against HIV, and a recent publication by those scientists suggests it may even be useful targeting specific cancer cells. The HIV clinical trial is being led by Vir Biotechnology, which licensed the vaccine platform from OHSU. Sacha sees the development as the latest in the rapid advance of medical research to treat or prevent disease. “It’s a massive sea change within our lifetimes,” Sacha said. “There is no question we are on the cusp of the next generation of how we address infectious disease.” In addition to OHSU, research institutions involved in the study included the Tulane National Primate Research Center, the University of Pittsburgh, the University of Washington, and the Washington National Primate Research Center at the UW. In the interest of ensuring the integrity of our research and as part of our commitment to public transparency, OHSU actively regulates, tracks and manages relationships that our researchers may hold with entities outside of OHSU. In regard to this research, OHSU and OHSU faculty involved in this research, including Jonah Sacha, Ph.D., have a significant financial interest in VIR Biotechnology Inc., a company that may have a commercial interest in the results of this research and technology. All research involving animal subjects is reviewed and approved by a university’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). The IACUC’s priority is to ensure the health and safety of animal research subjects. The IACUC also reviews procedures to ensure the health and safety of the people who work with the animals. The IACUC conducts a rigorous review of all animal research proposals to ensure they demonstrate scientific value and justify the use of live animals. The research was supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Grand Challenges grant awards OPP1213553 and National Institute of Allergy And Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health award R01AI40888; with support from the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health award P51OD011092 to the Oregon National Primate Research Center at OHSU. The findings and conclusions contained within are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect positions or policies of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation or the National Institutes of Health. Previous Story OHSU researchers discover link between proteins in tears, pain after eye surgery Next Story OHSU study finds unhealthy air quality from wildfires may impact fertility treatments Media Contact Erik Robinson Senior Media Relations Specialist 503-494-8231 Email Erik Downloads Jonah Sacha, Ph.D. (OHSU) Research is leading the way to a universal influenza vaccine Jonah Sacha, Ph.D., senior co-author of a study published today in the journal Nature Communications, says new research could lead to a universal influenza vaccine withing five years. (OHSU/Christine Torres Hicks) Jonah Sacha, Ph.D. Research is leading the way to a universal influenza vaccine Jonah Sacha, Ph.D., senior co-author of a study published today in the journal Nature Communications, says new research could lead to a universal influenza vaccine withing five years. (OHSU/Christine Torres Hicks) Links Nature Communications: Cytomegalovirus vaccine vector-induced effector memory CD4 + T cells protect cynomolgus macaques from lethal aerosolized heterologous avian influenza challenge University of Pittsburgh Center for Vaccine Research Related Better, longer-lasting flu vaccine to be developed at OHSU OHSU-developed vaccine shows promise for cancer prevention Lab-made antibodies offer potential cure for yellow fever HIV vaccine candidate’s mysteries unlocked 20 years later One-time gene therapy injection could provide HIV treatment that may last a lifetime Social Media Facebook X YouTube LinkedIn Instagram RSS OHSU Social Hub Email Subscription Subscribe to e-mail updates Quick Links OHSU facts Media guidelines Media kits Public records request OHSU flame logo in white Oregon Health & Science University is dedicated to improving the health and quality of life for all Oregonians through excellence, innovation and leadership in health care, education and research. © 2001-2024 OHSU. OHSU is an equal opportunity affirmative action institution. Notice of Privacy Practices OHSU Home Contact Español Russian | Pycckий About OHSU Maps and Directions Jobs Make a Gift Accessibility Diversity and Inclusion Integrity Office of Civil Rights Investigations and Compliance Title IX Volunteer Patient Resources Billing and Insurance Find a Doctor Find a Clinic For Patients and Visitors Clinical Trials Price Transparency Research About Administration Centers and Insitutes Cores and Shared Resources Library OHSU Innovates Research Expertise Academics School of Medicine School of Nursing School of Dentistry School of Public Health College of Pharmacy Admissions Student Services For Employees O2 Intranet Email Connecting Off-Campus Inclusive Care and Access Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Instagram OHSU Braille services OHSU sign language services OHSU interpreter services XOfficials probe heat-wave factors in H5N1 spread to Colorado poultry cullers | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu Officials probe heat-wave factors in H5N1 spread to Colorado poultry cullers Lisa Schnirring Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) Supersmario / iStock Share Copied to clipboard As the investigation continues into recent avian flu infections in as many as five workers who culled Colorado poultry, officials today said that industrial fans in poultry barns where temperatures exceeded 104°F could have spread the virus through windblown feathers and through the air, potentially reducing the effectiveness of personal protective equipment (PPE).Also, early genetic analysis suggests that the virus that infected the poultry and the workers is the same H5N1 genotype infecting dairy cattle, a useful clue for officials who are examining connections between the farms.Quick response, bracing for more casesSo far, four H5 avian flu infections have been confirmed in cullers working at a large Colorado layer farm in Weld County that was hit by the virus. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is working to confirm a fifth presumptive positive case.At a Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) telebriefing today, Nirav Shah, MD, JD, principal deputy director for the CDC, said 60 workers with symptoms were tested, and so far only 5 tested positive in Colorado's testing for H5 avian influenza. Others may be sick with other illnesses, such as rhinovirus. Shah praised Colorado health officials for their planning and preparedness. "As soon as there were symptomatic poultry workers, they sprang into action." David Boucher, PhD, director of infectious disease preparedness and response at the HHS Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response, said that, before the outbreaks, Colorado officials had obtained additional PPE from the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS), including goggles, gloves, and respirators. In the wake of infections in livestock workers, the state ordered and immediately received about 500 oseltamivir (Tamiflu) courses from the SNS.Officials, however, are bracing for more cases, given the ongoing laborious culling process and challenges with the heat and PPE. PPE challenges in sweltering barnsJulie Gauthier, DVM, MPH, executive director for field operations with the US Department of Agriculture's (USDA's) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, said there are roughly 160 people involved in the culling process, and those who have hands-on roles wear Tyvek suits, N95 respirators, goggles, boots, and gloves. She said it's possible that the hard push from the industrial fans may make it hard for workers to keep their goggles and respirators in place.She said culling is a laborious process that requires workers to load several dozen chickens onto carbon dioxide gas carts, which kills the birds within about 90 seconds. The layer farm houses about 1.8 million birds, and officials expect the culling operation to be completed over the next 10 to 14 days.Shah said a confluence of factors may have contributed to the farm worker infections and that the investigation is still under way. He added that a CDC environmental hygienist is part of the field team and is looking at ways to optimize PPE use and reduce the risk from environmental factors.Eric Deeble, DVM, acting senior adviser for highly pathogenic avian influenza at the USDA, told reporters that it's important for depopulation activities to continue, and that, if they are paused, workers would still be exposed to the H5N1 while caring for the surviving birds.Symptoms vary in infected workersSo far, all of the H5N1-infected workers have mild infections and are recovering, Shah said. Though the CDC said earlier that the patients' symptoms include conjunctivitis and typical flu symptoms, he emphasized that not all workers had respiratory symptoms and not all had eye symptoms.No other illnesses have been found in patient contacts, he said. The workers are contractors who specialize in depopulation and have close connections at work as well as in their living situations, which Shah said makes contact tracing a bit easier for state health officials.So far, there is no sign that the virus is more severe or more transmissible, either from animals to people or among humans, he said. The virus still remains avian, with no changes to make it better adapted to mammals. For now, Shah said H5 vaccine use isn't indicated, though officials continue to closely assess the situation.USDA field team on siteDeeble told reporters that a four-person trace-back team is on site to conduct the epidemiologic investigation on the animal side. They will explore how the poultry contracted the B3.13 genotype virus from cows. Weld County, where the layer farm is located, has been a hot spot for dairy farm H5N1 outbreaks in Colorado. Deeble said poultry are very susceptible to the H5N1 virus. "It doesn't take much to introduce it into a flock."He said officials still have high hopes for eliminating the virus in dairy cattle, with good biosecurity and good farmer participation. Deeble said officials aren't seeing any change in the pattern of spread. "The virus moves with the cattle and the people associated with them." Related news Previous Next Studies describe deadly avian flu outbreaks among seals, terns Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen Lisa Schnirring CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Lisa Schnirring California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases Lisa Schnirring Utah reports avian flu in dairy cows as USDA announces plan for bulk milk sampling Lisa Schnirring USDA announces first H5N1 avian flu detection in US pigs Lisa Schnirring H5N1 avian flu isolate from dairy worker is transmissible, lethal in animals Lisa Schnirring This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateInfluenza B: Symptoms, Treatments, and Comparison to Flu A Skip to content Menu Health A-Z COVID-19 Arthritis Type 2 Diabetes Heart Disease Digestive Health Multiple Sclerosis View All Prevention & Treatment Diet & Nutrition First Aid Surgery Health Care Health Insurance Public Health Patient Rights Disability Caregivers & Loved Ones End of Life Concerns View All News COVID-19 Health News Tools & Resources Thyroid Test Analyzer Doctor Discussion Guides Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer Lipid Test Analyzer Complete Blood Count (CBC) Analyzer What to Buy About Us Editorial Process Meet Our Medical Expert Board Search Search GO Health A-Z COVID-19 Arthritis Type 2 Diabetes Heart Disease Digestive Health Multiple Sclerosis View All Prevention & Treatment Diet & Nutrition First Aid Surgery View All Health Care Health Insurance Public Health Patient Rights Disability Caregivers & Loved Ones End of Life Concerns View All News COVID-19 Health News View All More in Cold & Flu Flu Prevention Symptoms Treatment Common Cold Related Illnesses View More Tools & Resources Thyroid Test Analyzer Doctor Discussion Guides Hemoglobin A1c Test Analyzer Lipid Test Analyzer Complete Blood Count (CBC) Analyzer What to Buy About Us Editorial Process Privacy Policy Contact Us Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Ⓒ 2024 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved Cold & Flu Flu Influenza B: Symptoms, Treatment, and How It Compares to Influenza A By Kelly Burch Updated on July 17, 2024 Medically reviewed by Jason DelCollo, DO Print Table of Contents View All Table of Contents Influenza B Symptoms Treatment Flu A vs. Flu B When to See a Healthcare Provider Close Influenza B is one of two main types of viruses that are responsible for seasonal flu epidemics each year. The other type is flu A, which can be more serious. Both are highly contagious and cause the same flu symptoms including coughing, fever, and body aches. Treatment for flu B often includes home remedies and letting the virus take its course. In some situations, prescription antiviral medications are used to treat the flu. Illustration by Mira Norian for Verywell Health What Is Influenza B? Influenza B viruses cause a respiratory illness that infects the nose, throat, and sometimes the lungs. On average, about 8% of the United States population is diagnosed with flu each year. The influenza A virus is typically more common and accounted for more than 97% of cases during the 2022-2023 season. Globally, however, influenza B accounts for about 23% of cases. Flu B is contagious and easily passed from person to person. The best way to prevent flu A and flu B is by getting your annual flu vaccine. The flu vaccine protects against the most common flu strains. To avoid infection, it's also important to practice good hygiene, including frequent hand washing. Types of Flu There are four types of flu viruses, designated A, B, C, and D, but the most common in humans are A and B. Symptoms Flu A and B cause the same types of symptoms, so it’s impossible to tell which variety you have from symptoms alone. Flu B symptoms can range from mild to severe. They often come on quickly and last for about a week. There are a number of common flu symptoms that can affect the different parts of the body. Respiratory symptoms may include: Cough (may be severe and last for weeks) Chest discomfort (may be severe) Runny or stuffy nose Sneezing Sore throat Body symptoms may include: Fever (may come on quickly and lasts for three to four days) Body aches Headaches (may be severe) Chills Fatigue Flu in a child can cause a fever as high as 103 degrees to 105 degrees Fahrenheit. If a fever does not improve with medication, or occurs in a child younger than 12 weeks, seek urgent medical care. Although it is rare, some people may also have stomach symptoms, such as: Nausea Vomiting Diarrhea Abdominal discomfort Children with influenza are more likely than adults to experience stomach symptoms with the flu. They're also more likely in people with a flu B infection. How to Treat Flu B In most cases, treatment for the flu involves home remedies (including resting, staying hydrated, and sticking to mild, comforting foods, like chicken soup) and letting the virus take its course. However, prescription antiviral medications can be used to treat the flu if it is diagnosed within the first 48 hours of symptoms. This is especially important for high-risk individuals, including people over 65, those who are pregnant, or people with other health conditions. Since flu B symptoms can be as severe as those caused by flu A, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that people over the age of 65 and other high-risk individuals use antiviral medications for flu A and flu B infections. If you feel flu symptoms coming on, call your healthcare provider as soon as possible to get tested and start treatment. 8 Home Remedies for Flu Influenza A vs. Influenza B Influenza A and influenza B both cause symptoms of cough, sore throat, body aches, and fever. They have their differences, though, including: Influenza A also affects animals while influenza B is found only in humans.Influenza A has more subtypes affecting people, animals, or both.Studies in children find digestive tract symptoms more common with influenza B. It’s commonly said that flu A causes worse illness than flu B. However, research from the CDC indicates both flu strains are similarly dangerous and can cause severe illness, especially in high-risk populations such as people over age 65. Influenza is most contagious in the 24 hours before symptoms begin, but it can still be spread for about five to seven days. When to See a Healthcare Provider Seek medical attention if you experience: Severe chest pain Trouble breathing Respiratory symptoms that persist beyond two weeks Respiratory symptoms that resolve and then return If you are over the age of 65 or have health issues considered high-risk, call your healthcare provider as soon as symptoms start to get tested and start antiviral treatment if your test is positive. Summary Flu A and flu B are two common types of flu that affect humans. The infections are caused by different types of the influenza virus, flu B can be as serious as flu A. The symptoms are the same and treatment involves home remedies and sometimes prescription antiviral medications. A Word From Verywell Influenza B viruses can cause epidemics [outbreaks of disease affecting a region], but influenza A viruses can cause both epidemics and pandemics [which spread across the country or world].The seasonal flu shot is designed to protect against both influenza A and influenza B viruses. Talk to your healthcare provider about getting the vaccine before flu season begins. — JANE KIM, MD, MEDICAL EXPERT BOARD 10 Sources Verywell Health uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our editorial process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content accurate, reliable, and trustworthy. Bhat YR. Influenza B infections in children: A review. World J Clin Pediatr. 2020 Nov 19;9(3):44-52. doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v9.i3.44. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Types of influenza. Tokars JI, Olsen SJ, Reed C. Seasonal Incidence of Symptomatic Influenza in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. 2018 May 2;66(10):1511-1518. doi:10.1093/cid/cix1060. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza Activity in the United States during the 2022–23 Season and Composition of the 2023–24 Influenza Vaccine. Ghebrehewet S, MacPherson P, Ho A. Influenza. BMJ. 2016;355:i6258. doi:10.1136/bmj.i6258 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Flu symptoms and complications. Johns Hopkins Medicine. Influenza (Flu) in Children. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. New CDC study compares severity of illness caused by flu A and B viruses. Avni T, Babich T, Nir A, Yahav D, Shaked H, Sorek N, et al. Comparison of clinical outcomes of influenza A and B at the 2017-2018 influenza season: a cohort study. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2020 Jun;39(6):1109-1114. doi: 10.1007/s10096-020-03822-x. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Influenza in Animals. By Kelly Burch Burch is a New Hampshire-based freelance health writer with a bachelor's degree in communications from Boston University. See Our Editorial Process Meet Our Medical Expert Board Share Feedback Was this page helpful? Thanks for your feedback! What is your feedback? Other Helpful Report an Error Submit Related Articles Rapid Flu Test Accuracy How to Take an At-Home Flu Test Can You Get the Flu in Summer? 24-Hour Stomach Bug What You Should Know About H3N2 Flu Flu Symptoms and Treatment Does the H1N1 Virus Still Exist? What Happens If I Get the Flu While Pregnant? Flu vs. Allergies: What Are the Differences? Flu Shot Ingredients: Learn What They Contain, Their Safety, and Health Benefits Influenza Treatments: How to Get Better at Home or With Medication Differences Between Influenza A and Influenza B Can You Get the Flu From a Flu Shot? These Foods Can Help You Recover From the Flu Faster (and Some You Should Avoid) 8 Supplements Dietitians Recommend to Boost Immunity What You Shouldn’t Do When You Have the Flu Daily Health Tips to Your Inbox Email Address Sign Up You're in! Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up. There was an error. Please try again. Health A-Z Prevention & Treatment Health Care News Meet Our Medical Expert Board About Us Editorial Process Diversity Pledge Privacy Policy In the News Advertise Terms of Service Careers Contact Follow Us Verywell Health's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Ⓒ 2024 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved Verywell Health is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.Changes in the epidemiological characteristics of influenza in children in Zhengzhou, China, in the post-COVID-19 era | BMC Public Health | Full Text Skip to main content Advertisement Search Explore journals Get published About BMC My account Search all BMC articles Search BMC Public Health Home About Articles Submission Guidelines Collections Join the Editorial Board Submit manuscript Changes in the epidemiological characteristics of influenza in children in Zhengzhou, China, in the post-COVID-19 era Download PDF Download PDF Research Open access Published: 19 July 2024 Changes in the epidemiological characteristics of influenza in children in Zhengzhou, China, in the post-COVID-19 era Wanyu Jia1, Xue Zhang1, Ruiyang Sun1, Peng Li1, Xinggang Zhen1, Yu Li2, Daobin Wang3, Changqing Li4 & …Chunlan Song1,5 Show authors BMC Public Health volume 24, Article number: 1938 (2024) Cite this article 674 Accesses Metrics details AbstractBackgroundInfluenza is a contagious respiratory disease posing a huge burden of disease for children around the world. The purpose of this study was to investigate the epidemiologic changes in childhood influenza in Zhengzhou, China, before, during, and after the COVID-19 outbreak. The aim of this study was to determine the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and related prevention and control policies on the children’s influenza epidemiological trend.MethodsAll influenza report card data from the Children’s Hospital Affiliated with Zhengzhou University’s Disease Surveillance Reporting Management System were collected and analyzed monthly from January 2018 to December 2023. The period of the study was divided into three phases for comparison: the pre-pandemic period, the pandemic period, and the post-pandemic period.ResultsBetween January 2018 and December 2023, a total of 82,030 children with influenza were diagnosed at our hospital, including 46,453 males and 35,577 females. A total of 11,833 of them had to be hospitalized for influenza, and 321 of them were brought to the ICU. Influenza showed low-level epidemiologic status during the COVID-19 pandemic, and there was a substantial rise in influenza and a surge in the number of cases after the COVID-19 pandemic period. The year 2023 will had the most influenza cases (40,785). The peak incidence of influenza changes in 2022, from July to October, and in 2023, from February to April and from October to December. During the post-pandemic period, the proportion of new-borns and young children among influenza patients decreased, while the proportion of school-age children increased significantly, and the proportion of influenza patients hospitalized and the proportion of ICU admissions decreased.ConclusionInfluenza showed low-level epidemiologic status during the COVID-19 pandemic. In the post-pandemic period, there is a large increase in influenza incidence, with a double peak in influenza incidence. The proportion of school-age children with influenza has also increased. As a result, we recommend that influenza vaccination for key populations, particularly school-age children, be completed by October of each year in Henan Province, and that the government and schools increase education about nonpharmacological influenza prevention approaches. Peer Review reports BackgroundInfluenza is a contagious respiratory disease caused by influenza A and influenza B viruses, which are seasonally prevalent each year. Annual influenza epidemics, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), result in 1 billion infections, 3–5 million cases of severe disease, and 300,000–500,000 deaths [1]. China has included the influenza virus in the national catalog of legally recognized infectious diseases as a Category C infectious disease, which are also known as monitoring and management infectious diseases, patients with such infectious diseases, suspected patients and carriers of infectious diseases required to report should be reported online within 24 h after diagnosis. The population is generally susceptible to influenza viruses, and infants, young children, elderly people, and people with chronic illnesses are at high risk of serious illness and death from influenza [2]. Globally, the incidence of influenza in children under 5 years of age is estimated to be 90 million cases per year [3]. In China, the annual influenza incidence rate among children is 20%-30% during the epidemic season, and the annual infection rate can reach 50% during certain high epidemic seasons [2]. Influenza poses an enormous burden of disease for children around the world. The influenza vaccine is the most effective measure for preventing influenza, and the WHO recommends influenza vaccination for high-risk groups such as children, elderly individuals and medical personnel [4]. The influenza vaccine is a nonimmunization program in China, and residents are vaccinated voluntarily [5]. Therefore, understanding the epidemiological trend of influenza in children can provide a scientific foundation for the creation of efficient preventive and control measures, which are extremely important for the management of epidemics, the reduction of influenza morbidity in children, and the prevention and treatment of epidemics.In December 2019, COVID-19 began a worldwide pandemic, and in January 2020, China initiated a national blockade in response to the outbreak with emergency measures. Since February 2020, the spread of many respiratory viruses, including influenza viruses, has been significantly suppressed (or decreased), and the incidence of influenza has decreased substantially [6,7,8]. Between 2020 and 2022, China adopted dynamic zeroing measures for COVID-19 outbreaks which does not require complete “zero infection”, but for each outbreak that occurs, it is required to contain it within a relatively short period of time, before abandoning its three-year zero new crown policy in December 2022 [9]. Subsequently, China lifted preventative and control measures against COVID-19 as a Category A infectious disease on January 8, 2023, with no additional large-scale interventions beginning in January 2023. With the liberalization of the embargo, the population is experiencing mass infections with SARS-CoV-2 Omicron, while cases of other types of infectious diseases are also increasing [9, 10]. Most of the current studies have focused on the decline in the incidence of a wide range of diseases following the COVID-19 outbreak, with fewer studies on the impact on the incidence of a wide range of diseases following the lifting of control measures for the COVID-19 outbreak. The purpose of this study was to investigate the epidemiologic changes in childhood influenza in Zhengzhou, China, before, during, and after the COVID-19 pandemic; to analyze the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related prevention and control policies on the epidemiological trend of childhood influenza; and to provide a theoretical basis for the prevention and control of childhood influenza in the future.MethodsData collectionOur hospital is a large tertiary-level A pediatric specialty hospital with 1810 beds, and a nationally designated sentinel hospital for the surveillance of influenza-like illness in children. Tertiary-level A hospitals are the highest level in the “three levels, six grades” classification of hospitals in mainland China, and are hospitals above the regional level that provide high-level specialized medical and healthcare services and perform higher education and scientific research tasks to several regions. We collected all influenza report card data from the Disease Surveillance Reporting Management System of the hospital from January 2018 to December 2023 and analyzed the data on a monthly basis. The throat swab influenza viral nucleic acid test or influenza antigen test were given to all clinically diagnosed cases with influenza symptoms in our hospital. The Influenza Surveillance Reporting Management System counted all cases of clinically diagnosed influenza in the outpatient and inpatient departments of the hospital with one or more of the following positive pathogenicity tests: [1] positive influenza viral nucleic acid test; (2) positive influenza antigen test.Statistical analysisAccording to the changes in the COVID-19 pandemic and preventive and control measures, our study period was divided into three main phases, from January 2018 to January 2020 for the pre-pandemic period, from February 2020 to January 2023 for the pandemic period, and from February 2023 to December 2023 for the post-pandemic period. The epidemiologic characteristics of influenza patients in the three periods were then compared. Excel was utilized for data summary processing, while SPSS 26.0 and Excel were used for data analysis and graphing.ResultsCharacteristics of the study subjectsBetween January 2018 and December 2023, a total of 82,030 children with influenza were diagnosed at our hospital, including 46,453 males and 35,577 females, and the sex ratio was approximately the same every year, at approximately 1.3:1, with the age ranging from 1 day to 18 years old. Among them, 11,833 children with influenza were in serious condition and required hospitalization, and 321 children were admitted to intensive care units (ICUs) due to critical conditions. The highest number of influenza cases is in 2023 (40,785). (Table 1) Monthly trends in the number of influenza cases over the years are shown in Fig. 1. Table 1 Cases of influenza from January 2018 to December 2023Full size tableFig. 1Monthly trends in the number of influenza cases. The dashed lines indicate the point in time when the COVID-19 outbreak began and the COVID-19 pandemic endedFull size imageSeasonal variation in the number of influenza casesAs shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, in the pre-pandemic period, the peak incidence of influenza was mainly concentrated between November and January. During the pandemic period, after the COVID-19 outbreak and the emergence of state control measures, 2020 saw a significant decrease in the number of influenza cases throughout the year, with no significant peak in the number of influenza cases. In 2021, the number of influenza cases began to increase with the relaxation of state controls and peaked from November through January. In 2022, the number of influenza cases will continue to increase, but the peak incidence will occur from July to October. In the post-pandemic period, there was a substantial increase in the number of influenza cases in 2023 and a change in the peak incidence to February-April and October- December.Fig. 2Monthly trends in the number of influenza casesFull size imageChanges in the age composition of influenza patientsBased on the growth and development of the children, we stratified the patients according to age and divided them into four groups: infancy (less than or equal to 1 year old), early childhood (2–3 years old), preschool (4–5 years old), and school-age (greater than or equal to 6 years old). As shown in Table 1 and Fig. 3, the trend in the number of children with influenza in different age groups was more or less the same as the overall trend. It is interesting to note, however, that following the COVID-19 pandemic, the age distribution of influenza patients shifted. (Fig. 4) In the pre-pandemic period, the majority of influenza cases were in infants under 1 year old and 2–3 years old, with 23.36% and 28.84%, respectively. After the outbreak, there was a decline in the proportion of infants and young children among influenza cases and a significant increase in the proportion of school-age children (6 years and older), which peaked at 46.60%. The trend in age of influenza hospitalizations was consistent with the overall number of cases. (Fig. 5).Fig. 3Monthly trends in the number of influenza cases in different age groups. The dashed lines indicate the point in time when the COVID-19 outbreak began and the COVID-19 pandemic endedFull size imageFig. 4Changes in the age composition of influenza patients. *The numbers in () mean the total number of cases of influenza at different stages. * The horizontal coordinate represents three main phases of our study periodFull size imageFig. 5Changes in the age composition of influenza hospitalizations patients. *The numbers in () mean the total number of hospitalizations cases of influenza at different stages. * The horizontal coordinate represents three main phases of our study periodFull size imageChanges in the proportion of severe and critical influenza cases and deathsComparing the pre-pandemic period to the post-pandemic period, we can observe a decrease in the proportion of influenza patients hospitalized and the proportion of ICU admissions. The highest percentage of hospitalized children with influenza was in 2019 (28.91%), and the lowest percentage was in 2023 (9.07%). The proportion of deaths due to influenza did not vary much between the years. (Table 1).DiscussionInfluenza is a seasonal epidemic that occurs every year. The COVID-19 outbreak and the implementation of national control measures have had an impact on the epidemiological trends of a wide range of diseases [11]. Numerous studies have shown a significant decrease in influenza incidence following the COVID-19 pandemic across various regions of the world [8, 12, 13]. This study analyzed the number of influenza cases in the Children’s Hospital Affiliated with Zhengzhou University between January 2018 and December 2023, and the findings revealed a significant decrease in influenza cases in the first pandemic year following the February 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, followed by a modest increase in the second and third pandemic years. After China’s zero-tolerance policy for COVID-19 was fully lifted in January 2023, there was a surge in the number of influenza cases, which is in general agreement with the findings of Liu P et al. in Shanghai, China [10, 14]. Previously, studies have identified variable increases in influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, and enterovirus during the COVID-19 pandemic (2021–2022) as SARS-CoV-2 infections declined and nonpharmacological interventions were relaxed [15]. Our study similarly confirmed this finding and revealed a more severe backlash against the flu virus in 2023.This phenomenon may be due to a combination of factors. First, during the pandemic, most children were homebound due to public health control measures and had reduced exposure to influenza viruses, which triggered influenza “immune debt” after prolonged minimal exposure to influenza viruses and decreased immunity in the population [16, 17]. Second, annual influenza vaccination is the most effective means of preventing influenza and significantly reduces the risk of influenza and serious complications for those who are vaccinated [18]. However, due to prolonged home control, most children were not vaccinated against influenza during the pandemic, resulting in the loss of vaccine protection. Moreover, after the lifting of the ZERO-COVID policy in China in December 2022, China experienced a mass infection of the population with the Omicron virus, and although the symptoms of the infection in children were relatively mild, the viral infection was detrimental to the overall immunity of the children; as a result, there was a wave of influenza infections that occurred very soon after the wave of Omicron infections. In addition, this may also be related to changes in patients’ medical treatment behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to lockdown measures and other reasons, some patients with mild influenza may reduce their visits to hospitals.Our study similarly revealed that not only did the number of influenza cases change but also the seasonal peaks in the number of influenza cases changed equally during and after the pandemic. The peak number of influenza cases in 2022 and 2023 appears to shift forward and backward to varying degrees. In China, influenza A has a winter epidemic pattern in the northern provinces north of 33 degrees north latitude, a single annual peak in spring in the southernmost provinces south of 27 degrees north latitude, and a double-cycle peak in mid-latitude areas every winter and summer [2]. Henan Province is located in northern China, and the peak season for influenza is from November to January each year. However, in 2022, the peak of the number of influenza cases was changed to July to October, and 2023 showed a double peak epidemic trend, from February to April and from October to December. Meanwhile, it is interesting to note that according to the monthly influenza surveillance report from our Disease control department, influenza A and B were co-prevalent during the peak monthly period of October-December 2023, with influenza B accounting for about one-fourth of the overall total. This was similarly found in a study by Boqiang Chen et al. [19]. This is obviously connected to COVID-19 nonintervention measures. Zhengzhou’s prevention and control measures have gradually loosened since June 2022 due to a decrease in SARS-CoV-2 viral infection, and since October 2022, Zhengzhou has taken highly rigorous control measures due to the large-scale transmission of SARS-CoV-2. This finding reaffirms the impact of nondrug interventions on respiratory transmission diseases and reminds us that in addition to promoting vaccination, nondrug interventions are essential for influenza prevention and control. Therefore, we recommend that children complete their influenza vaccination before October each year in order to provide immune protection.Another important and interesting finding is that the age composition of influenza cases in children changed during and after the pandemic. In this study, we observed an increasing trend in the prevalence of influenza in school-aged and preschool-aged children. We speculate that this phenomenon may be related to the following: 1. School-aged children are more likely to be exposed to influenza viruses after the pandemic due to school attendance, whereas children under 3 years of age are less likely to be out of the house, and caregivers are more attentive to respiratory viral precautions in the later stages of the pandemic than in the pre-pandemic period, with a decreased likelihood of contracting the virus. 2. A greater proportion of school-aged children are likely to have infections in the January 2023 wave of Omicron infections, and these children may be more susceptible to the influenza virus than are uninfected children for a period of time after infection with Omicron. Dynamic observations are still needed regarding how the age composition ratio of childhood influenza patients changes in the future. Based on the above findings, we suggest that school-age children should be more active in completing influenza vaccination. The government and schools should strengthen the promotion of nonpharmacological interventions for the prevention of respiratory viral infections, such as maintaining good personal hygiene, washing hands frequently, avoiding going to crowded places, and avoiding contact with respiratory infections to maintain good respiratory hygiene practices.In this study, we also found that there was a decrease in the proportion of hospitalized children and ICU admissions among children with influenza admitted to our hospital. During the pandemic, this may be because nonpharmacologic interventions not only reduce the spread of influenza but also reduce the likelihood of severe illness. In the post-pandemic, even we think that children’s immunity to influenza generally declines, but we found that although the number of children with influenza increased, the proportion of children hospitalized with influenza declined. The decrease in the proportion may be attributed to the fact that more parents refused to be hospitalized in the aftermath of the pandemic due to concerns such as cross-infection. Another reason may be that the number of cases soared due to the limited number of beds in hospitals, preventing some of the children who needed to be hospitalized from being admitted to the hospitals. This may also be because after the COVID-19 pandemic, people’s awareness and attention to infectious diseases increased, so treatment of the disease in the early stage was more active, preventing the development of severe disease. However, the current observation period is relatively short, and long-term observation is still needed for future changes in the proportion of severe childhood influenza cases.In summary, our study revealed that the COVID-19 pandemic and nonpharmacological interventions had dramatic impacts on influenza epidemics in terms of the number of influenza cases, peak, age composition, and proportion of critical illnesses. In the post-pandemic period, there was an outbreak and a forward shift in the peak incidence of influenza cases due to several factors, including immunization debt, which reminds us to pay attention not only to the spread of SARS-CoV-2 after the deregulation of COVID-19 but also to the pandemics of other types of respiratory transmissible diseases.Our study has some limitations. We examined the medical files from only one hospital. And due to the absence of records in the case system, we do not have access to the immunization coverage of the catchment population and the immunization coverage of the patient population over the study period. However, the number of cases is representative of China’s largest tertiary-level A pediatric specialty hospital and a nationally designated sentinel hospital for the surveillance of influenza-like illness. Our observation of changes in the number of influenza cases in the post-pandemic period was short-lived, and longer monitoring will be needed in the future. Since we did not have access to influenza type information, we analyzed only the overall cases of influenza without grouping them according to the type of influenza virus, but the seasonal epidemics of influenza are mainly dominated by influenza A; therefore, the results of this study are still informative. Meanwhile, according to the 2023 influenza detection report of the Department of Disease Control and Prevention of our hospital, the influenza epidemic in the peak period from February to April of 2023 was dominated by influenza A, and the incidence of influenza B was less. The peak period from October to December in 2023 showed a common epidemic trend of influenza A and influenza B, and influenza B accounted for about 1/4 of the total, which showed an increasing trend compared with February-April.ConclusionIn conclusion, the epidemiologic pattern of influenza in China changed both during the COVID-19 pandemic and in the latter part of the pandemic. There was a surge in the number of influenza cases in the latter part of the pandemic, along with an earlier peak of influenza onset and an increase in the proportion of school-aged children with influenza. Therefore, we recommend that influenza vaccination for key populations, especially school-age children, be completed by October each year, and that the government and schools increase education on nonpharmacological interventions to prevent influenza. Availability of data and materials The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. AbbreviationsICU: Intensive care units WHO: World Health Organization References Krammer F, Smith GJD, Fouchier RAM, Peiris M, Kedzierska K, Doherty PC, et al. Influenza. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018;4(1):3.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Group of Respirology,Chinese Pediatric Society, Chinese Medical Association. China National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases Group of Respirology CPS, Association CM, Expert consensus on diagnosis and treatment of influenza in children. (2020 Edition). Chin J Appl Clin Pediatrs. 2020;2020(17):1281–8.Nayak J, Hoy G, Gordon A. Influenza in Children. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2021;11(1):a038430. Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar World Health O. Global influenza strategy 2019–2030. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019. p. 2019. Google Scholar Prevention CCfDCa. Technical guidelines for seasonal influenza vaccination in China (2022–2023). Chin J Viral Dis. 2023;13(1):1–19. Google Scholar Sun J, Shi Z, Xu H. Non-pharmaceutical interventions used for COVID-19 had a major impact on reducing influenza in China in 2020. J Travel Med. 2020;27(8):taaa064.Article PubMed Google Scholar Chen B, Wang M, Huang X, Xie M, Pan L, Liu H, et al. Changes in incidence of notifiable infectious diseases in china under the prevention and control measures of COVID-19. Front Public Health. 2021;9:728768.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Fricke LM, Glöckner S, Dreier M, Lange B. Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions targeted at COVID-19 pandemic on influenza burden - a systematic review. J Infect. 2021;82(1):1–35. Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ioannidis JPA, Zonta F, Levitt M. What really happened during the massive SARS-CoV-2 omicron wave in China? JAMA Intern Med. 2023;183(7):633–4.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu P, Cheng F, Su L, Ye Z, Xu M, Lu L, et al. An outbreak of influenza A in Shanghai after ending the zero-COVID policy in February-March 2023. J Infect. 2023;87(2):e33–5. Article PubMed Google Scholar Zhao X, Li M, Haihambo N, Jin J, Zeng Y, Qiu J, et al. Changes in temporal properties of notifiable infectious disease epidemics in china during the COVID-19 pandemic: population-based surveillance study. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 2022;8(6):e35343.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Huang QM, Song WQ, Liang F, Ye BL, Li ZH, Zhang XR, et al. Non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented to control the COVID-19 were associated with reduction of influenza incidence. Front Public Health. 2022;10:773271.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Feng L, Zhang T, Wang Q, Xie Y, Peng Z, Zheng J, et al. Impact of COVID-19 outbreaks and interventions on influenza in China and the United States. Nat Commun. 2021;12(1):3249. Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Liu P, Xu J. Resurgence of influenza virus activity during COVID-19 pandemic in Shanghai, China. J Infect. 2023;86(1):66–117.PubMed Google Scholar Yang MC, Su YT, Chen PH, Tsai CC, Lin TI, Wu JR. Changing patterns of infectious diseases in children during the COVID-19 pandemic. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023;13:1200617.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hatter L, Eathorne A, Hills T, Bruce P, Beasley R. Respiratory syncytial virus: paying the immunity debt with interest. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2021;5(12):e44–5. Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Billard MN, Bont LJ. Quantifying the RSV immunity debt following COVID-19: a public health matter. Lancet Infect Dis. 2023;23(1):3–5. Article PubMed Google Scholar Tanner AR, Dorey RB, Brendish NJ, Clark TW. Influenza vaccination: protecting the most vulnerable. Eur Respir Rev. 2021;30(159):200258.Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen B, Zhu Z, Li Q, He D. Resurgence of different influenza types in China and the US in 2021. Math Biosci Eng. 2023;20(4):6327–33. Article PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsNot Applicable.FundingThis study was supported by the 2023 Open Subjects of Henan Provincial Engineering Research Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Pediatric Infections and Critical Illnesses [China] under [grant number ERC202304].Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsHenan Province Engineering Research Center of Diagnosis and Treatment of Pediatric Infection and Critical Care, Children’s Hospital Affiliated to Zhengzhou University, Henan Children’s Hospital, Zhengzhou Children’s Hospital, Zhengzhou, 450018, Henan, ChinaWanyu Jia, Xue Zhang, Ruiyang Sun, Peng Li, Xinggang Zhen & Chunlan SongChinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, BeijingBeijing, 100000, ChinaYu LiZhecheng County People’s Hospital, Shangqiu, 476200, Henan, ChinaDaobin WangXinzheng Huaxin People’s Hospital, Zhengzhou, 450000, Henan, ChinaChangqing LiPresent Address. : No. 1, South University Road, Erqi District, Zhengzhou, 450018, Henan, ChinaChunlan SongAuthorsWanyu JiaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXue ZhangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRuiyang SunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPeng LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarXinggang ZhenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYu LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDaobin WangView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChangqing LiView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarChunlan SongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsWanyu Jia, Xue Zhang and Ruiyang Sun were responsible for the data curation methodology. Xinggang Zhen were responsible for providing the raw data. Wanyu Jia was responsible for writing the original draft. Peng Li, Yu Li, Daobin Wang, Changqing Li and Chunlan Song revised the article critically for important intellectual content. Peng Li, Daobin Wang, Changqing Li and Chunlan Song final approval of the version to be submitted.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Chunlan Song.Ethics declarations Ethics approval and consent to participate Not Applicable. Consent for publication Not Applicable. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher’s NoteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleJia, W., Zhang, X., Sun, R. et al. Changes in the epidemiological characteristics of influenza in children in Zhengzhou, China, in the post-COVID-19 era. BMC Public Health 24, 1938 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-024-19460-3Download citationReceived: 29 February 2024Accepted: 12 July 2024Published: 19 July 2024DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-024-19460-3Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsInfluenzaCOVID-19Epidemiological characteristics Download PDF Advertisement BMC Public Health ISSN: 1471-2458 Contact us General enquiries: journalsubmissions@springernature.com Read more on our blogs Receive BMC newsletters Manage article alerts Language editing for authors Scientific editing for authors Policies Accessibility Press center Support and Contact Leave feedback Careers Follow BMC BMC Twitter page BMC Facebook page BMC Weibo page By using this website, you agree to our Terms and Conditions, Your US state privacy rights, Privacy statement and Cookies policy. Your privacy choices/Manage cookies we use in the preference centre. © 2024 BioMed Central Ltd unless otherwise stated. Part of Springer Nature.Cytomegalovirus vaccine vector-induced effector memory CD4 + T cells protect cynomolgus macaques from lethal aerosolized heterologous avian influenza challenge | Nature Communications Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature communications articles article Cytomegalovirus vaccine vector-induced effector memory CD4 + T cells protect cynomolgus macaques from lethal aerosolized heterologous avian influenza challenge Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 19 July 2024 Cytomegalovirus vaccine vector-induced effector memory CD4 + T cells protect cynomolgus macaques from lethal aerosolized heterologous avian influenza challenge Daniel Malouli1 na1, Meenakshi Tiwary1 na1, Roxanne M. Gilbride1, David W. Morrow ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4686-830X1, Colette M. Hughes1, Andrea Selseth ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9536-463X1, Toni Penney2, Priscila Castanha3, Megan Wallace3, Yulia Yeung3, Morgan Midgett4, Connor Williams3, Jason Reed1, Yun Yu1, Lina Gao ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9382-04191, Gabin Yun5, Luke Treaster5, Amanda Laughlin ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0002-4285-21084, Jeneveve Lundy4, Jennifer Tisoncik-Go ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-1381-265X6, Leanne S. Whitmore ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8721-87016, Pyone P. Aye ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-4764-39652, Faith Schiro2, Jason P. Dufour2, Courtney R. Papen1, Husam Taher1, Louis J. Picker1, Klaus Früh ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8014-38771, Michael Gale Jr ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6332-74366,7, Nicholas J. Maness ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-9332-78912, Scott G. Hansen1, Simon Barratt-Boyes ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8869-49453 na2, Douglas S. Reed ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0076-90234 na2 & …Jonah B. Sacha ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-7633-31221 na2 Show authors Nature Communications volume 15, Article number: 6007 (2024) Cite this article 5097 Accesses 574 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Cellular immunityInfluenza virusTranslational researchVaccines AbstractAn influenza vaccine approach that overcomes the problem of viral sequence diversity and provides long-lived heterosubtypic protection is urgently needed to protect against pandemic influenza viruses. Here, to determine if lung-resident effector memory T cells induced by cytomegalovirus (CMV)-vectored vaccines expressing conserved internal influenza antigens could protect against lethal influenza challenge, we immunize Mauritian cynomolgus macaques (MCM) with cynomolgus CMV (CyCMV) vaccines expressing H1N1 1918 influenza M1, NP, and PB1 antigens (CyCMV/Flu), and challenge with heterologous, aerosolized avian H5N1 influenza. All six unvaccinated MCM died by seven days post infection with acute respiratory distress, while 54.5% (6/11) CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM survived. Survival correlates with the magnitude of lung-resident influenza-specific CD4 + T cells prior to challenge. These data demonstrate that CD4 + T cells targeting conserved internal influenza proteins can protect against highly pathogenic heterologous influenza challenge and support further exploration of effector memory T cell-based vaccines for universal influenza vaccine development. Similar content being viewed by others MCMV-based vaccine vectors expressing full-length viral proteins provide long-term humoral immune protection upon a single-shot vaccination Article Open access 07 January 2022 Pre-existing neutralizing antibodies prevent CD8 T cell-mediated immunopathology following respiratory syncytial virus infection Article Open access 16 December 2019 Synthetic modified vaccinia Ankara vaccines confer cross-reactive and protective immunity against mpox virus Article Open access 16 February 2024 IntroductionThe world remains at risk of another influenza pandemic. The four influenza pandemics of the past 100 years killed tens of millions of people, yet a universal influenza vaccine capable of protecting against future pandemic influenza viruses still does not exist. Current antibody-mediated influenza vaccines are strain-specific due to targeting of the highly variable hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins. Indeed, given the continual sequence evolution of HA and NA through antigenic drift and ability of the segmented virus to recombine two or more different strains through antigenic shift, seasonal influenza vaccine effectiveness ranges from 30% to 60% depending on matching of the vaccine sequence to influenza viruses subsequently circulating that year1,2. Furthermore, these vaccines provide little, if any, protection against pandemic influenza viruses. Of particular concern are highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses circulating among wild and captive birds, such as H5N1, which has a documented fatality rate of 52% in humans3. Given the increasing number and geographical spread of HPAI infections in birds4, and the minimal amino acid changes necessary for avian influenza viruses to become transmissible via aerosol droplets in mammals5,6,7, the world is at severe risk of an HPAI pandemic. Indeed, the first case of mammal to human transmission of H5N1 was recently reported in a dairy farm worker8, highlighting the potential for HPAI to transmit to humans. Thus, new vaccine approaches capable of protecting against all influenza strains, and particularly against HPAI with pandemic potential, are urgently needed.While current antibody-based vaccine approaches can provide sterilizing immunity, they narrowly focus on subtype-specific HA and NA sequences and are thus susceptible to antigenic mismatch with new strains that arise annually via antigenic drift or emerge suddenly with pandemic potential via genetic reassortment. In contrast to the high sequence diversity of influenza HA and NA glycoproteins, the internal structural proteins such as matrix (M) and nucleocapsid protein (NP), and viral polymerases like PB1, are highly conserved across all strains9. Indeed, pre-existing T cells targeting internal influenza proteins can recognize disparate influenza variants and provide heterosubtypic protection from disease against novel influenza strains in humans10,11,12. Harnessing T cell immunity against internal influenza proteins therefore represents a potential pathway towards universal influenza vaccine development. However, there is a dearth of vaccine vectors capable of priming and maintaining the high frequencies of pulmonary influenza-specific effector memory T cells (TEM) likely needed for protection. Indeed, almost all currently utilized clinical vaccine platforms, including the current whole inactivated influenza virus and messenger RNA delivery approaches, induce pathogen-specific T cells with a predominantly central memory (TCM) phenotype that require a period of anamnestic expansion prior to exerting antiviral activity following infection13,14. In contrast, the β-herpesvirus cytomegalovirus (CMV) elicits high-frequency TEM that home to peripheral organs, particularly the lung, where they are pre-positioned to intercept pathogens soon after infection15, suggesting that CMV may be an ideal vector for development of an influenza-specific T cell-based vaccine.Despite differences in their etiology, both influenza and HIV possess viral glycoproteins with high sequence diversity that stymie broadly-neutralizing antibody-based vaccine development, and, therefore, vaccine advancements that circumvent glycoprotein diversity in one virus may be transferrable to the other16. A pre-clinical HIV vaccine approach based on strain 68-1 rhesus CMV expressing internal simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) antigens (RhCMV/SIV) elicits high-frequency SIV-specific TEM that control SIV replication in 59% of vaccinated rhesus macaques (RM) across multiple studies in the absence of vaccine-elicited antibodies17. Strain 68-1 RhCMV, which lacks the pentameric receptor complex components Rh157.5/Rh157.4 and the viral CXC chemokine-like Rh158-Rh161 gene products (orthologs of human CMV [HCMV] UL128/UL130 and UL146/UL147 genes, respectively), induces MHC-E- and MHC-II-restricted CD8 + T cells17,18. However, while strain 68-1 RhCMV elicits unconventionally MHC-E- or MHC-II- restricted CD8 + T cells, RhCMV vectors can be genetically modified via repair of the Rh157.5/Rh157.4 and Rh158-Rh161 genes to generate full length (FL) RhCMV vectors that elicit conventionally MHC-Ia-restricted CD8 + T cells19. Therefore, CMV vectors can be generated to elicit the type of MHC-restricted CD8 + T cell required for protection against a particular pathogen. Indeed, while SIV-specific MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells are required for RhCMV/SIV-mediated protection against SIV replication17,20,21, they are not required for RhCMV/Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)-mediated protection against MTB in RM22. Regardless of MHC-restriction, RhCMV-induced CD4+ and CD8 + T cells persist longitudinally for years after the initial vaccination and accumulate to high levels in lung23,24,25. Finally, given the unique protection against SIV replication observed in RhCMV/SIV-vaccinated RM, clinical trials are currently underway to test the safety and immunogenicity of a HCMV vaccine vector for HIV26, providing a potential pathway for clinical CMV-based vaccines against other pathogens. Based on these attributes, we hypothesized that a CMV-based vaccine expressing conserved internal influenza proteins would generate high-frequency, pulmonary-resident, influenza-specific TEM with the ability to protect against a HPAI isolate with pandemic potential such as H5N1.ResultsGeneration and immunogenicity of CyCMV vaccine vectors for influenzaTo determine whether a CMV-based vaccine could protect against HPAI, we elected to utilize a stringent model of aerosolized H5N1 challenge of Mauritian cynomolgus macaques (MCM) where infection is uniformly lethal27. Given the strict species-specificity of CMV, strain 68-1 RhCMV does not infect MCM and cannot elicit T cell responses28, thereby precluding its use as a vaccine vector in the MCM model of aerosolized influenza. To facilitate use of MCM for CMV-based experiments, we recently isolated and characterized a full length cynomolgus macaque CMV (FL CyCMV) isolate, and subsequently generated a strain “68-1 like” double deleted (dd CyCMV) vaccine vector, whereby the CyCMV orthologues of the RhCMV pentameric receptor complex components Rh157.5/Rh157.4 and the viral CXC chemokine-like Rh158-Rh161 gene products are deleted to reflect genetic deletions present in strain 68-1 RhCMV29. Vaccination of MCM with FL CyCMV expressing SIV Gag elicited Gag-specific MHC-Ia-restricted CD8 + T cells, while vaccination of MCM with dd CyCMV expressing SIV Gag generated Gag-specific CD8 + T cells that were either MHC-II- or MHC-E-restricted, mirroring the MHC restriction patterns elicited by FL or strain 68-1 RhCMV/Gag in RM, respectively29. Furthermore, half of dd CyCMV/SIV-vaccinated MCM controlled SIV replication post infection, and manifested a vaccine-induced IL-15 transcriptomic signature that is associated with efficacy in RhCMV/SIV-vaccinated RM29,30. Therefore, central features of the RhCMV vaccine vector in RM are conserved with CyCMV in MCM, facilitating pre-clinical studies in MCM-based models of disease.In addition to MHC-Ia, the major cellular targets of influenza virus, epithelial cells and type I and II pneumocytes, express MHC-E and MHC-II31,32,33,34. Therefore, we generated two sets of CyCMV vaccine vectors expressing influenza antigens, one set based on FL CyCMV to induce MHC-Ia-restricted CD8 + T cells, and another based on dd CyCMV to induce MHC-II- and MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells (Supplementary Fig. 1A–C). We selected 1918 H1N1 influenza M, NP, and PB1 as vaccine antigens for the following two reasons: 1) in contrast to the more variable HA and NA glycoproteins, the M, NP, and PB1 proteins are highly conserved among the human and avian influenza viruses recorded across the previous decades35, making them ideal T cell targets (Supplementary Fig. 1D, and 2) using 1918 influenza antigen sequences would yield nearly a century of natural global influenza evolution between the 1918 influenza vaccine antigen sequences and the heterologous influenza A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1) challenge virus, facilitating a stringent test of the protective capabilities of a T cell-based vaccine for influenza. We generated three separate vectors by inserting the 1918 influenza M1, NP, or PB1 sequence into the Cy110 open reading frame (ORF) of either FL or dd CyCMV, and confirmed protein expression in each vector in infected fibroblasts in vitro, to generate a set of vaccine vectors collectively named FL CyCMV/Flu or dd CyCMV/Flu, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 1A–C). The Cy110 gene, the orthologue of the HCMV UL82 gene encoding the pp71 protein necessary for lytic replication, was selected for the site of antigenic insertion as this configuration retains genome and transgene stability while rendering a spread-deficient CMV vector with an increased safety profile that maintains immunogenicity30.We vaccinated six influenza seronegative MCM subcutaneously with 1 × 107 PFU with each of three individual vectors comprising either FL CyCMV/Flu or dd CyCMV/Flu and boosted with the same dose at 15 weeks post prime Fig. 1A; Supplementary Table 1). One FL CyCMV/Flu vaccinated MCM died from study-unrelated causes at 129 days post immunization, leaving five MCM in that group for all timepoints onward. We monitored the influenza transgene-specific CD4+ and CD8 + T cell response in peripheral blood and found that these responses persisted throughout the vaccine induction phase with no significant differences between the magnitude of the response engendered by FL or dd CyCMV (Fig. 1B). All three influenza transgenes were recognized by both CD4+ and CD8 + T cell responses, with no significant differences observed between those elicited by FL versus dd CyCMV in peripheral blood or lung, as measured by bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL) (Fig. 1C). In line with previous observations of CMV vaccine vectors in nonhuman primates22,24,29, high frequencies of transgene-specific CD4+ and CD8 + T cells were observed in the BAL at the final timepoint measured prior to influenza challenge in both FL and dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM (Fig. 1C, bottom row). As expected with CMV-based vectors, CyCMV/Flu-elicited CD4+ and CD8 + T cells recognizing influenza antigens exhibited a predominantly TEM phenotype in peripheral blood as measured by expression of CD28 and CCR7 (Fig. 1D). Next, we defined the MHC-restriction of influenza-specific CD8 + T cells engendered by FL CyCMV or dd CyCMV vectors. To this end, we first performed an intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) assay with the first fifteen 15mer-peptides overlapping by 11 amino acids that span the 1918 NP open reading frame to identify CD8 + T cell responses (Fig. 1E). To define the MHC restriction of peptides eliciting a CD8 + T cell response, we repeated the above ICS assay in the presence of each of the following reagents: the pan MHC-I-blocking antibody W6/32, the leader sequence-derived MHC-E-blocking VL9 peptide, the MHC-II-blocking G46.6 antibody, or isotype control reagents. NP-specific CD8 + T cells in dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM recognized peptides in the context of MHC-E or MHC-II, while NP-specific CD8 + T cells in FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM recognized peptides in the context of MHC-Ia (Fig. 1E). Finally, we measured whether CyCMV/Flu-elicited influenza-specific T cells could recognize diverse influenza isolates in vitro via incubation of PBMC from CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM with inactivated influenza isolates. Both CD4+ and CD8 + T cells from FL and dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM responded to all isolates tested, with the majority of isolates recognized similarly by T cells, regardless of the vaccine vector set utilized (Fig. 1F). Thus, both FL and dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM generated robust influenza-specific TEM capable of recognizing disparate influenza isolates in vitro, regardless of MHC-restriction, suggesting that these T cell responses might offer protection against challenge with heterologous HPAI.Fig. 1: Vaccine phase immunology of CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated Mauritian cynomolgus macaques (MCM).A Study overview with major events illustrated. *Note that one FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM died during the vaccine phase due to study-unrelated causes. B Total (summed responses against 1918 influenza M1 + NP + PB1) vaccine-induced CD4+ (left) and CD8+ (right) T cell responses during the vaccine phase in dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (black) and FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (red) MCM. N = 6 for each timepoint, except for n = 5 for FL CyCMV/Flu from day 133 onwards due to loss of one animal. C Magnitude of the CD4+ (left two graphs) and CD8+ (right two graphs) T cell responses in peripheral blood (top row) and bronchoalveolar lavages (BAL, bottom row) against all antigens summed or individual antigens at the final timepoint prior to H5N1 challenge in dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (black) and FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (red) MCM. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to challenge while closed circles denote those that survived. N = 6 for dd CyCMV/Flu and n = 5 for FL CyCMV/Flu. D Memory phenotype of NP transgene-specific CD4+ (left) and CD8+ (right) T cells in the PBMC of the ddCyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (black) and FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (red) MCM. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to challenge while closed circles denote those that survived. PBMC for this assay were pooled from days 28, 56, 161, and 168 post vaccination. N = 6 for each group. E MHC restriction of CD8 + T cell responses to 1918 influenza NP. Boxes depict NP 15mers recognized by CD8 + T cells in a given animal with colors indicating MHC-restriction of each response as indicated. PBMC for this assay were pooled from days 105, 119, 133, 147, 161, and 168 post vaccination. F Recognition of the various inactivated whole influenza isolates indicated on the x axis by CD4+ (left) or CD8+ (right) T cells in the PBMC of dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (black) and FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated (red) MCM following overnight co-culture. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to challenge while closed circles denote those that survived. N = 6 for each group. PBMC for this assay were pooled from days 105, 119, 133, 147, 161, and 168 post vaccination. Box plots in B–D, F show jittered points and a box from first to third quartiles and a line at the median, with whiskers extending to the farthest data point within 1.5x IQR above and below the box. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Figure 1A created with BioRender.com released under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International license.Full size imageChallenge with aerosolized avian H5N1 influenzaTo measure the protective capabilities of CyCMV/Flu-induced influenza-specific TEM cells against a heterologous challenge virus, we challenged all MCM with small-particle aerosols containing a target dose of 5.5 log10 PFU of the HPAI isolate A/Vietnam/1203/2004(H5N1). To ensure experimental rigor and avoid introduction of any potential bias in clinical scoring, all study staff involved in the aerosolized influenza challenges were blinded to the vaccine status of the MCM until after completion of the challenge phase of the study (Fig. 1A). The inhaled dose was calculated by collecting an aerosol sample during each exposure to measure viral concentration in the aerosol and then multiplying aerosol concentration by the volume of total air inhaled by the MCM during the exposure, as previously described in ref. 27. No statistical difference in the mean inhaled dose of aerosol virus was measured between the groups (Fig. 2A).Fig. 2: Aerosolized H5N1 challenge of CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM.A Viral titer of the aerosolized inoculum delivered to each MCM in the unvaccinated (blue), dd CyCMV/Flu (black), or FL CyCMV/Flu (red) group. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to challenge. N = 6 for unvaccinated and dd CyCMV/FL groups, while n = 5 for FL CyCMV/Flu due to loss of one animal in vaccine phase. One-way ANOVA overall p-value is shown. B Viral titer of BAL samples taken after challenge. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to the infection. N = 6 for unvaccinated and dd CyCMV/FL groups, while n = 5 for FL CyCMV/Flu at first timepoint. C Summed thoracic radiograph score of MCM following challenge. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to the infection. N = 6 for unvaccinated and dd CyCMV/FL groups, while n = 5 for FL CyCMV/Flu at first timepoint. D Temperature change from baseline of MCM following challenge. Open circles denote MCM that succumbed to the infection. N = 6 for unvaccinated and dd CyCMV/FL groups, while n = 5 for FL CyCMV/Flu at first timepoint. E Survival curve of MCM in the unvaccinated (blue), dd CyCMV/Flu (black), or FL CyCMV/Flu (red) groups. P-values shown are log-rank test of each group versus unvaccinated. Box plots in A–C show jittered points and a box from first to third quartiles and a line at the median, with whiskers extending to the farthest data point within 1.5x IQR above and below the box. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageFollowing challenge with aerosolized influenza, all MCM were monitored for severity of infection via influenza titers in lung via BAL, changes in body temperature via telemetry, pulmonary infiltration via chest radiographs, and development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) requiring euthanasia via a pre-defined clinical scoring sheet. As expected, based on experience with CMV-based vectors for SIV and MTB22,24,29, CyCMV/Flu vaccination did not prevent infection. Infectious influenza virus was found in BAL fluid in every MCM following challenge (Fig. 2B). There was a trend towards lower viral titers in BAL fluid from dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM at two and four days post infection, but this difference was not statistically significant. Infectious influenza began to clear from BAL fluid from survivors at day seven post infection, with no virus found in samples from any MCM at 15 days post infection. Longitudinal chest radiographs were performed and scored by radiologists blinded to the treatment of the animals, which revealed pulmonary infiltrates in the lungs of all MCM, with no statistically significant differences observed between the vaccine and control groups (Fig. 2C). All MCM developed fever following infection, which eventually resolved in CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated survivors but not in the unvaccinated controls (Fig. 2D). In line with previous results from this aerosol challenge model27, all unvaccinated MCM developed ARDS and met humane endpoint criteria within seven days of exposure (Fig. 2E). In contrast, four of six dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM survived through the 14-day post-challenge monitoring period, resulting in statistically significant protection from HPAI-induced death. Two out of five FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM survived through day 14 post exposure, but protection in this group did not reach statistical significance. When both vaccine groups were combined, six of 11 CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM survived, yielding overall vaccine-mediated statistically significant protection against lethal disease, regardless of the specific CyCMV/Flu vaccine vector utilized (Fig. 2E). Thus, while CyCMV-based vaccination did not prevent infection or significantly alter influenza-induced fever and pulmonary infiltration, it did significantly protect against HPAI-induced death.Correlates of protection in CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCMWe recently demonstrated that a vaccine-phase, IL-15-based, whole blood transcriptomic signature of protection against SIV replication in strain 68-1 RhCMV/SIV-vaccinated RM was also present in dd CyCMV/SIV-vaccinated MCM that subsequently resisted SIV replication29,36. To determine if a similar transcriptomic signature might exist in dd or FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM that survived HPAI infection, we performed RNA sequencing of whole blood from all dd and FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM immediately prior to vaccination and 1, 3, 7, and 14 days post prime and boost vaccination (Fig. 3A). We then assessed if the previously described RhCMV/SIV protection signature IL-15 response pathway genes enriched in dd CyCMV/SIV-vaccinated MCM could distinguish outcome following HPAI infection. The 122 genes previously identified in CyCMVSIV-mediated protection against SIV replication included genes involved in death receptor signaling, immune cell signaling programs, pattern recognition receptor signaling, and NK cell response (Supplementary Data 1). We plotted the fold change in these genes across the vaccination time series and assessed for conservation of this IL-15-based signature in CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM that survived challenge with otherwise lethal aerosolized HPAI as previously described29,36. This analysis revealed that the CyCMV/SIV-associated protection signature, although present in some vaccinated MCM, did not correlate with CyCMV/Flu-mediated protection against HPAI in either FL or dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM, indicating a mechanistically distinct means of protection mediated by CyCMV/Flu against lethal HPAI compared to CyCMV/SIV-mediated protection against SIV replication (Fig. 3B).Fig. 3: Correlates of protection in CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM protected from lethal H5N1 influenza challenge.A Experimental timeline of sampling for whole blood transcriptomic analysis during the ddCyCMV/Flu vaccine phase. BD=boost day. B Time series heatmap of the dd CyCMV/SIV IL−15 protection signature genes (left, under dd CyCMV/SIV) compared to dd CyCMV/Flu (middle) and FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM (right). Protected animals are denoted with a red heading bar versus unprotected animals in black in the protection row. Plotted are log2 fold change values of the 122 leading edge genes across the vaccination time series (Days 0, 1, 3, and 7 post prime and boost immunizations). Red and blue denote up- and down-regulated log fold change to D0, respectively. The dd CyCMV/SIV data are from Malouli et al. 28. C Magnitude of the CD4+ (left two graphs) and CD8+ (right two graphs) T cell responses in peripheral blood against all CyCMV-vectored influenza antigens summed (total, left) or individual antigens (right) at the final timepoint prior to H5N1 challenge in MCM that died (grey open circles) versus those that survived (lavender closed circles) after H5N1 challenge. N = 6 for animals that survived and n = 5 for animals that died. PBMC for this assay were from day 161 post vaccination. D Magnitude of the CD4+ (left two graphs) and CD8+ (right two graphs) T cell responses in the lung (BAL) against all CyCMV-vectored influenza antigens summed (total, left) or individual antigens (right) at the final timepoint prior to H5N1 challenge in MCM that died (grey open circles) versus those that survived (lavender closed circles) after H5N1 challenge. N = 6 for animals that survived and n = 5 for animals that died. BAL cells for this assay were from day 133 post vaccination. Box plots in C and D show jittered points and a box from first to third quartiles and a line at the median, with whiskers extending to the farthest data point within 1.5x IQR above and below the box. In C and D for total T cell responses a 2-sided T test was used, while for M1, NP, and PB1 comparisons pairwise repeated measures ANOVA with 2-sided Tukey adjustment was used. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.Full size imageThe inability of the IL-15-based transcriptomic protection signature to distinguish protection outcomes following HPAI challenge indicated that unlike both RhCMV/SIV- and dd CyCMV/SIV-mediated protection against SIV replication29,36, CyCMV/Flu-mediated protection against lethal HPAI infection did not depend upon MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells and the IL-15 signaling pathway. Therefore, we next assessed if the magnitude of the vaccine-induced T cell response might correlate with outcome. To this end, we examined the magnitude of influenza transgene-specific T cells immediately prior to entry into the ABSL3 for influenza challenge, which revealed that MCM surviving HPAI challenge mounted significantly higher influenza-specific CD4 + T cell responses in peripheral blood compared to MCM that succumbed (Fig. 3C). In particular, CD4 + T cells targeting the M protein in blood were significantly associated with survival. In contrast, there was no association observed with the magnitude of influenza-specific CD8 + T cells in blood prior to challenge. Based on these observations, we performed the same analysis using T cell frequencies measured in BAL, which again revealed that influenza-specific CD4 + T cells, but not CD8 + T cells, correlated with survival following challenge with HPAI (Fig. 3D). Cumulatively, these data indicate that unlike CMV vector-mediated protection against SIV replication, protection against lethal HPAI infection does not depend on CD8 + T cells, regardless of their MHC restriction, but rather on the magnitude of influenza-specific CD4 + T cell prior to infection.DiscussionThe development of a universal influenza vaccine remains a top global health priority, but cannot be achieved via current approaches that generate strain-specific humoral immune responses. Indeed, as recently demonstrated by SARS-CoV-2, despite the ability to rapidly produce lipid nanoparticle mRNA-based vaccines, pathogen variability inevitably still yields viral variants that escape vaccine-induced neutralizing antibodies and subsequently circulate in the human population37. As such, novel vaccine approaches are needed that target conserved viral regions and provide heterosubtypic protection. To this end, we explored the potential of a CyCMV-vectored vaccine expressing conserved internal influenza antigens to protect against heterologous HPAI in a stringent macaque model of aerosolized influenza challenge. While murine CMV (MCMV) vectors expressing either a single influenza CD8 + T cell epitope or the entire HA protein have previously been shown to confer protection against influenza in mice38,39, the data presented here represents, to our knowledge, the first test of CMV vectors against influenza in primates. We found that CyCMV/Flu vectors induced influenza-specific CD8+ and CD4 + TEM, with the influenza-specific CD8 + T cells being restricted by MHC-Ia in FL CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM and MHC-II or MHC-E in dd CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM. Regardless of MHC-restriction, both CD8+ and CD4 + T cells from CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM recognized a panel of diverse influenza isolates in vitro. As expected, based on results from CyCMV/SIV-vaccinated MCM challenged with SIV29, CyCMV/Flu vaccination did not prevent acquisition of influenza in MCM. However, CyCMV/Flu-vaccinated MCM exhibited statistically significant protection from an otherwise lethal HPAI aerosolized challenge. This protection illustrates the potential of TEM responses for development of a universal influenza vaccine given that the vaccine encoded 1918 influenza M1, NP, and PB1 protein sequences and the H5N1 HPAI isolate circulated in 2004, yielding 86 years of global influenza evolution between the vaccine and heterologous challenge virus. Therefore, CMV-induced TEM responses targeting conserved viral antigens should be considered for inclusion in preventative approaches against pathogens such as influenza where sequence diversity in targets of antibody-mediated neutralization have stymied production of universally protective vaccines.There exist many advantages for the CMV vaccine platform, which are not shared by other virus-based vaccine vectors. First, CMV is able to efficiently superinfect previously CMV-infected individuals despite pre-existing anti-CMV immunity22,23,24,40. Second, CMV is highly immunogenic and elicits robust memory CD4+ and CD8 + T cell immunity. Indeed, in natural HCMV infection in humans, approximately 10% of circulating memory CD4+ and CD8+ memory T cells are HCMV-specific41. Third, CMV induced T cell responses are highly effector differentiated, thereby equipping these T cells with the ability to mediate an immediate effector response without the need to first anamnestically expand and differentiate22,23,24. Finally, in keeping with an effector memory phenotype, CMV-induced CD4+ and CD8 + T cells are widely distributed at high frequency in various anatomical tissues, including the lungs. Although the CyCMV vaccine vectors here are spread-attenuated30, they may still establish persistence in pulmonary myeloid lineage cells, thereby recruiting CyCMV/Flu-specific T cells to the lung. Based on these intriguing properties, and the unique protection against SIV replication observed in RhCMV/SIV-vaccinated RM, clinical trials are currently underway to test the safety and immunogenicity of a HCMV vaccine vector for HIV26, Thus, the HCMV vaccine platform could be utilized to clinically test the approach presented here for a universal influenza vaccine.Correlates analysis revealed that the previously identified IL-15 transcriptomic signature did not predict protection from lethal HPAI infection and that CD8 + T cells, regardless of MHC-restriction, did not associate with protection. Rather, the magnitude of the CyCMV-induced, influenza-specific CD4 + T cell response correlated to protection from HPAI-induced death. Although initially surprising given that both CyCMV/SIV- and RhCMV/SIV-mediated protection against SIV replication depends on the presence of SIV-specific, MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells and an IL-15-based signaling pathway17,29,36, this observation is in line with previous reports of the importance of CD4 + T cells in influenza infection. Multiple studies have demonstrated that memory CD4 + T cells mediate heterosubtypic protection in murine models of influenza42,43,44,45. While influenza-specific CD4 + T cells can orchestrate an effective immune response via interactions with both B cells and CD8 + T cells, they also demonstrate direct antiviral activity mediated via production of perforin and IFN-γ 42,46. Furthermore, the frequency of pre-existing NP- and M-specific CD4 + T cells correlated with less severe disease in human clinical studies following infection with previously unencountered influenza strains10. Thus, our correlate of protection based on the magnitude of pre-infection frequencies of vaccine-induced IFN-γ + CD4 + T cells is in line with previous studies, and indicates that CMV vector-mediated protection against influenza could be improved by refining the vaccine to optimize the priming of influenza-specific CD4 + T cells. However, the mechanism of protection mediated by influenza-specific CD4 + T cells following CMV vector vaccination remains undefined. We previously demonstrated that CyCMV vaccine vectors elicit little to no antibody responses against antigenic inserts present in the vaccine vector29. Therefore, it is unlikely that the CyCMV/Flu-elicited CD4 + T cells participated in priming a pre-existing antibody response targeting the internal viral proteins utilized as vaccine targets. Given that influenza-specific CD4 + T cells can exhibit direct antiviral activity42,46, we hypothesize that CyCMV/Flu-elicited CD4 + T cells mediated protection by directly inhibiting viral replication. IL-15 has previously been identified to support the generation of superior, lung-resident antiviral CD4 + T cells with the ability to protect against lethal influenza infection in mice47.Since IL-15 plays a critical role in the development of effector differentiated CD4 + T cells, including cytotoxic CD4 + T cells48, it is interesting that the IL-15-based transcriptomic signature that correlated with SIV protection mediated by MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells did not predict the protection against lethal HPAI observed here in the current study. It is therefore possible that IL-15 signaling was not a limiting factor for the function of the influenza-specific CD4 + T cells here as for the MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells in SIV protection29,36. Subsequent statistically powered CyCMV/Flu vaccine-based HPAI challenge studies in MCM are required to determine the mechanism of protection mediated by influenza-specific CD4 + T cells.Although MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells were not required for protection in the MCM model of influenza, the data presented here furthers our understanding of the epitope binding capacity of MHC-E by demonstrating that this monomorphic MHC molecule can bind a variety of influenza peptides for presentation to CD8 + T cells. Indeed, this observation is in line with two recent reports describing the ability of Qa-1, the murine orthologue of HLA-E in humans, and HLA-E to bind influenza-derived epitopes49,50. Of note, the HLA-E-binding influenza epitopes identified were derived from NP, which we also found can generate peptide epitopes capable of binding Mafa-E, the HLA-E orthologue in MCM, and activating MHC-E-restricted CD8 + T cells. Interestingly, Jost et al. further demonstrate that the NP-derived, HLA-E-binding peptide epitopes are targeted by antigen-specific NK cells, suggesting that such antigen-specific NK cell responses could contribute to the antiviral response against influenza49. Whether such responses could be elicited by CyCMV/Flu vaccine vectors remains unknown, and subsequent studies are required to fully investigate for the presence of memory NK cells following vaccination with CMV vectors. However, given the myriad of interactions documented to occur between CMV and NK cells21,51,52, it is possible that CMV vectors may be able to prime memory NK cell responses.Overall, we demonstrate that CyCMV vaccine vector-induced, influenza-specific CD4 + TEM protect MCM from an otherwise lethal HPAI infection. While it remains likely that a universal influenza vaccine will have to engender both humoral and cellular immune responses, the CMV vaccine vector platform is unique given its ability to elicit and maintain long-lived TEM, which could pair with a separate platform to stimulate both arms of the immune system. Furthermore, given that CMV vectors are now in clinical trials for HIV26, there exists a direct pathway forward for testing influenza-specific HCMV vectors in humans. Further such studies are required to determine if CMV-induced TEM can contribute to the development of a universal influenza vaccine.MethodsProduction of CyCMV/influenza vaccinesThe CyCMV vector constructs used in this study were based on the published FL-CyCMV (strain 31908) bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) and were generated by en passant homologous recombination28,29. The codon optimized DNA sequences of the Influenza A virus (IAV) (A/Brevig Mission/1/1918(H1N1) derived NP (AY744935), M1 (AY130766) and PB1 (DQ208310) genes were synthesized by GENEWIZ (Azenta Life Sciences). No M2 sequences were included. Within each DNA sequence, a 50 bp stretch was duplicated and the two homologous sequences were separated by an I-SceI restriction site and an aminoglycoside 3’-phosphotransferase (Kanamycin resistance, KanR) selection cassette. The vaccine inserts were amplified with recombination primers carrying a 50 bp overhang homologous to the upstream and downstream region of the Cy110 (UL82, pp71) ORF. Homologous recombinations were performed in E.coli strain GS1783 which can be used to express the λ phage derived Red recombination genes after heat shock induction and recombination resulted in the substitution of the Cy110 ORF with the vaccine inserts using endogenous viral regulatory elements to drive transgene expression25,29,30. Successful recombinants were analyzed by XmaI restriction digest and Sanger sequencing across the altered genomic locus to ensure genome integrity. The KanR cassette was removed from the vaccine insert by inducing a DNA double strand break in the BAC at the I-SceI- recognition site through the arabinose induced expression of I-Sce I in E.coli strain GS1783. Simultaneous expression of the Red recombination genes through heat shock induction resulted in homologous recombination of the introduced 50 bp homologous sequences in the DNA insert leading to seamless removal of the selection maker from the BAC. Final clones were once more analyzed by XmaI restriction digest and Sanger sequencing across the altered genomic locus and next generation sequencing of the full BAC was performed to exclude off-target mutations.Primary rhesus fibroblasts (RFs) were transfected with the final BAC constructs using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) to reconstitute the viral vectors. Initial seed stocks were expanded into eight confluent T-175 flasks of RFs, and cells and supernatants were harvested at full CPE and frozen at −80 °C overnight to release cell associated virus. Vector purification was performed by clarifying the supernatants by centrifugation, first at 2000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C and subsequently at 7500 x g for 15 minutes. Lastly, the CyCMV vectors were pelleted through a sorbitol cushion (20% D-sorbitol, 50 mM Tris [pH 7.4], 1 mM MgCl2) by centrifugation at 64,000 x g for 1 h at 4 °C in a Beckman SW28 rotor. The purified viral stocks were resuspended in DMEM complete, aliquoted in 125 ul aliquots and stored at −80 °C until final use. Viral titers of the purified viral stocks were determined in triplicates by immunofluorescence assay (IFA) as for HCMV53. RFs were infected with serial dilutions of each purified vector and the cells were fixed with 100% methanol at ≤− 20 °C after 72 h. The cells were first stained with an α-RhCMV pp65b antibody 19C12.2 and subsequently with an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG secondary (Invitrogen) for 1 h at 37 °C54. Afterwards, the cells were washed three times with PBS and the nuclei were stained with DAPI for 20 min at room temperature. An EVOS fluorescence microscope (Life Technologies) was used to acquire images of the titration plates which were processed and analyzed using the ImageJ software. The ratio of infected to uninfected cells was used as a measure to backcalculate the number of focus forming units per milliliter (FFU/ml) in each purified CyCMV vaccine vector stock.Mauritian cynomolgus macaquesMauritian-origin cynomolgus macaques (MCM) were purchased from a commercial vendor following serological testing confirming the absence of antibodies to influenza A and B viruses (Supplementary Table 1). MCM were split randomly into three experimental groups based on sex to yield equal numbers of male and female MCM in each group. All MCM were less than four years of age. MCM were moved to Tulane National Primate Research Center (TNPRC) for the vaccine phase of the project, which was reviewed and approved by the institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Tulane University. Animals were cared for in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Procedures for handling and ABSL2 containment of animals were approved by the Tulane University Institutional Biosafety Committee. The TNPRC is fully accredited by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International. Challenge of the MCM was performed at the University of Pittsburgh, which is fully accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International. Prior to challenge, the work with animals described in this report was approved by the University of Pittsburgh’s Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee (IACUC). CyCMV vectors were delivered subcutaneously at 1 × 107 PFU per vector.H5N1 aerosol challengeThe virus (H5N1 A/Vietnam/1203/2004) used in this study was generated via reverse genetics27,55 by Dr. S. Mark Tompkins at the Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, who provided the original reverse genetics stock which has been passaged twice in eggs. Under BSL3 conditions at the University of Pittsburgh Regional Biocontainment Laboratory, the virus was inoculated into 10-11 day-old embryonated specific pathogen free chicken eggs to generate a stock for use in these studies. Allantoic fluid was recovered at 24 h from inoculated eggs and clarified by centrifugation. Aliquots were then stored at −80 °C and virus titer was determined by plaque assay in MDCK cells. For aerosol challenges, virus was diluted in DMEM containing bovine serum albumin, HEPES buffer, and penicillin/streptomycin56. The virus stock was sequenced to confirm identity with the published sequence for A/Vietnam/1203/200427. Work done with this virus described in this report was approved by the University of Pittsburgh’s Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC), Biohazards Committee, and Department of Environmental Health & Safety prior to initiation of experiments.Aerosol exposures were performed using a Aerogen Solo (Aerogen) vibrating mesh nebulizer controlled by the Aero3G aerosol management platform (Biaera Technologies)27,55,56. MCM were anesthetized with 6 mg/kg Telazol (Tiletamine HCl / Zolazepam HCl) and transported to the Aerobiology suite using a mobile transport cart. The MCM was then transferred from the cart into a class III biological safety cabinet and the macaque’s head was placed inside a head-only exposure chamber. For accumulated tidal volume (ATV) exposures, Jacketed External Telemetry Respiratory Inductive Plethysmography (JET-RIP; Data Sciences International) belts were placed around the upper abdomen and chest of the macaque and calibrated to a Hans Rudolph pneumotach (Shawnee, KS) in Ponemah 5.4 software DSI (Data Sciences International). Once the belts were calibrated, virus was put into the nebulizer at a concentration of 5 × 106 pfu and the exposure started. During the exposure, tidal volume data was transferred from Ponemah to the Biaera software. Exposures were terminated when the macaques had breathed in a total of 6 liters of virus-laden air to achieve a target inhaled dose of 2 × 105 pfu57. If the belts could not be properly calibrated, exposures were time-calculated using minute volumes collected by a head-out plethysmography three days prior to challenge and the spray factor for H5N1 based on past performance. Exposures were dynamic, set to a total airflow of 16 liter per minute (lpm) of air into and out of the chamber (one complete air change every 2 min)57. Inhaled dose was determined by plaque assay on samples collected in an all-glass impinger (AGI; Ace Glass) attached to the chamber and at operated at 6 lpm, -6 to -15 psi throughout the exposure. Particle size was measured using an Aerodynamic Particle Sizer (TSI, Shoreview, MN); one sample was collected for 30 s at 5 min after the exposure had started. Following the exposure, the MCM was subjected to a 5 min air wash after which the macaque was removed from the cabinet and transported back to its cage and observed until fully recovered from anesthesia. Virus concentration in nebulizer was assessed by plaque assay to evaluate aerosol performance relative to previous aerosol exposures; inhaled dose was calculated as the aerosol concentration of the virus determined from the AGI multiplied by the accumulated volume of inhaled air (6 liters).Clinical scoring of chest radiographs and humane endpointsClinical signs were recorded at least twice daily and given an objective score to ensure that severely ill or moribund animals were identified quickly. The scoring system included body temperature (especially hypothermia), clinical appearance, and respiratory signs (cageside observation as well as plethysmography data and SPO2 readings) as follows: Temperature: normal range 36 to 39.5 oC = 0; Elevated > 39.5 oC = 1; Hypothermia 34–36 oC = 2; Severe Hypothermia < 34 oC = 3. Clinical Appearance: Normal=0; Lethargic, huddled=1; Moves only when prodded=3. Respiratory Symptoms: None=0; Nasal discharge=1; Increased respiratory rate and effort=2; Respiratory distress (defined as taking shallow breaths at twice the resting rate)=3. A combined score of 4 or a score of 3 in any one category required increased direct observation to every 4–6 h. The telemetry system was set to send alerts if body temperature dropped below 36 oC, which triggered an immediate cage side observation to determine the cause. Macaques that reached a clinical score of 6, were severely hypothermic (body temperature <34 oC for ≥4 h), or were found to be unresponsive were promptly euthanized. Ventro-dorsal radiographs of sedated macaques were taken using an SRI portable radiographic unit with digital radiograph processing using a Fujifilm processor. Radiographs were scored by two radiologists blinded to the vaccine and infection state of the macaques using a scale of 0–3 with each lung divided into three fields, for a total scoring range of 0–1858.TelemetryDSI PhysioTel Digital radiotelemetry transmitter (DSI Model No. M00) capable of continuously recording body temperature and activity were implanted abdominally in all the macaques used in this study. Macaques were allowed to heal for at least 14 days prior to transfer into the RBL and challenge. Implants were turned on 4-5 days prior to aerosol challenge to collected baseline data for modeling. Data was transmitted from the implant to TRX-1 receivers mounted in the room connected via a Communications Link Controller (CLC) to a computer running Ponemah v6.5 (DSI) software. Data collected from Ponemah was exported as 15 min averages into Excel files which were subsequently analyzed in MatLab 2019a as previously described59,60. Pre-exposure baseline data was modeled using auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) to forecast body temperature after challenge, assuming no significant change in temperature. Residual temperatures were calculated as actual minus predicted temperatures. Significant elevations or decreased in temperature were determined by upper and lower residual limits calculated as the product of 3 times the square root of the residual sum of squares from the baseline data. Maximum deviation in temperature (Max ∆T) was the highest residual difference between actual and predicted body temperature after challenge. Fever duration was calculated in hours, dividing the number of significant elevations by 4. Fever severity was calculated as the sum of all significant elevations in body temperature after challenge, divided by 4 to get fever-hours. Average elevation was calculated by dividing fever severity by fever duration.Plaque assayInfectious virus in tissue homogenates, BAL, nasal/oral, and aerosol samples were determined by standard plaque assay in MDCK cells. Prior to plaque assays, MDCK cells in DMEM-10 media were put into six-well plates and grown until they were 70–80% confluent. Snap-frozen tissues were homogenized in media containing FBS using an Omni tissue homogenizer (Omni International). Samples were diluted serially 10-fold and inoculated onto MDCK cells (200 µl per well) for 1 hour at 37 °C a plates before being overlaid with 1% agarose-containing EMEM. Plates were then incubated for 3 d at 37 °C, 5 d at 37 °C for tissues, fixed overnight in 10% formaldehyde at room temperature, and finally stained with 0.25 % crystal violet to visualize plaques.Statistics & reproducibilityMixed effect model with antigen as repeated measures was performed to compare T cell responses by different vaccination methods (FL vs dd CyCMV/Flu) and outcomes (survived vs. terminal). For the in vitro influenza challenge, t-test was conducted for comparing T cell responses of different vaccination methods under each virus incubation. Viral titer and thoracic radiographic scores were compared among different treatment-by-outcome combinations or among different timepoints, using ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer comparison, as some comparisons were not estimable using the mixed effect model due to missing data of early terminations. Kaplan-Meier with log-rank test were performed for survival. Viral load analysis was run on log 10-transformed data. Analysis was performed with SAS9.4 (PROC MIXED, PROC TTEST and PROC GLM) software. A sample size of n = 6 animals per group was selected based on previous studies with CMV vaccine vectors, thus no statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. Animals were assigned randomized into three experimental groups based on sex to yield equal numbers of males and females in each group. No data were excluded from the analyses. Investigators performing the influenza challenges were blinded to the vaccine status of animals until after completion of the study.Immunological assaysPBMC was isolated from EDTA-treated whole blood using Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare) density centrifugation52,61,62,63. Cells were resuspended in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FBS (R10; Hyclone Laboratories, Logan, UT). CD4+ and CD8 + T cells specific for influenza were detected as described for other pathogens using flow-cytometric intracellular cytokine analysis29,64,65,66,67. Sequential 15-mer peptides (Genscript) that overlap by 11 amino acids comprising the sequence of Influenza A virus (A/BrevigMission/1/1918(H1N1)) Matrix1 (M1), Nucleoprotein (NP), or Polymerase-Basic 1 (PB1) proteins were combined with PBMC or mononuclear cells from BAL and co-stimulatory antibodies anti-CD28 and anti-CD49d. Cells were combined with peptide antigen and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C 5% CO2 before the addition of Brefeldin A and an additional eight-hour incubation. After incubation, cells were chilled at 4 °C overnight. Co-stimulation without antigen served as a negative control. Cells were then stained with fluorochrome conjugated antibodies listed below and data was acquired on an LSRII (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo software (BD Biosciences). CD4+ and CD8 + T cell antigen specific responses were determined by the boolean expression of CD69 + TNFα + OR CD69 + IFNγ+ frequencies. Longitudinal analysis of responses were memory corrected using CD28 and CD95 markers to define memory populations68. MHC blocking ICS were performed as above except peptide stimulation was preceded by the addition of one of each the following specific inhibitors: 1) the pan anti-MHC-I mAb W6/32 (10 mg/mL), 2) the MHC-II-blocking mAb L243 (10 mg/mL), or 3) the MHC-E blocking VL9 peptide (VMAPRTLLL; 20 μM) for one hour before peptide was added20,69. To be considered MHC-E restricted by blocking, the individual peptide response must have been blocked by both anti-MHC-I clone W6/32 and MHC-E-binding peptide VL9, and not blocked by the anti-MHC-II clone L243. To be considered MHC-II-restricted by blocking, the individual peptide response must have been blocked by the anti-MHC-II clone L243 and not blocked by either the anti-MHC-I clone W6/32 or the MHC-E-binding peptide VL9. To be considered MHC-Ia-restricted by blocking, the individual peptide response must have been blocked by the anti-MHC-I clone W6/32 and not blocked by either the MHC-E-binding peptide VL9 or the anti-MHC-II clone L243. For influenza subtype recognition assays, PBMC were incubated with beta-propiolactone (BPL)-inactivated influenza virus in conditions matching previously described peptide-stimulations and then intracellular cytokine stained as described above. The following reagents were obtained through the International Reagent Resource, Influenza Division, WHO Collaborating Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology and Control of Influenza, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA: BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1), FR-736, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Bangladesh/3002/2015 (H1N1)pdm09, FR-1458, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Shanghai/2/2013 (H7N9), FR-1390, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Sichuan/26221/2014 (H5N6), FR-1433, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Hong Kong/33982/2009 (H9N2), FR-775, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Ohio/02/2012 (H3N2), FR-1144, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9), FR-1283, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/pheasant/New Jersey/1355/1998 (H5N2), FR-912, and BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/mallard/Netherlands/12/2000 (H7N7), FR-914.AntibodiesTo define the memory vs. naïve subsets, the following antibodies were used: SP34-2 (CD3; BUV395, BD Biosciences), SK-1 (CD8; BUV737; BD Biosciences), G043H7 (CCR7; Biotin; BioLegend), Streptavidin (BV421; BioLegend), L243 (HLA-DR; BV510; BioLegend), L200 (CD4; BV786; Fisher Scientific), B57 (Ki67; FITC; BD Biosciences), DX2 (CD95; PE; BioLegend), CD28.2 (CD28; PE/Dazzle 594; BioLegend), CH/4 (CD69; PE-Cy5.5; Life Technologies), 3A9 (CCR5; APC; BD Biosciences), 2H7 (CD20; APC-Fire 750; BioLegend). For T cell response and recognition assays, the following antibodies were used: CD28.2 (CD28; Pure; Life Technologies), 9F10 (CD49d; Pure; Life Technologies), SP34-2 (CD3; Pacific Blue; BD Biosciences), L200 (CD4; BV510; eBiosciences (PE) Biolegend (PE/Dazzle 594)), B57 (Ki67; FITC; BD Bioscience), Mab11 (TNFα; PE, FITC; BioLegend), FN50 (CD69; PE, PE/Dazzle 594; BioLegend), SK-1 (CD8a; PerCP-eFluor 710; Life Tech) and B27 (IFNγ; APC; BioLegend).Influenza phylogenetic analysisThe nucleotide sequences from the following influenza strains were aligned using Clustal Omega70, aligning each segment independently, followed by neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree construction using Geneious software: A/Alabama/01/2020 (H1N1), A/California/03/2019 (H1N1), A/Aichi/2/68 (H3N2), A/Hong Kong/01/1968 (H3N2), A/Cambodia/X0123311/2013 (H5N1), A/Alabama/01/2010 (H1N1), A/Anhui/1/2005 (H5N1), A/Aalborg/INS132/2009 (H1N1), A/Japan/305/1957 (H2N2), A/Guiyang/1/1957 (H2N2), A/Albany/20/1957 (H2N2), A/Albany/10/1968 (H2N2), and A/Brevig Mission/1/1918 (H1N1).RNAseqWhole blood was collected from MCM into PAXgene RNA tubes (PreAnalytiX) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was isolated using RNAdvance Blood Kit (Beckman) following the manufacturer’s instructions. mRNAseq libraries were constructed and sequenced using Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA HT kit following the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq500 sequencer using Illumina NextSeq 500/550 High Output v2 kits (150 cycles) following the manufacturer’s protocol for sample handling and loading36. Raw sequencing reads were de-multiplexed with bcl2fastq. Residual adapters and low quality bases were then removed with Trim Galore, a wrapper for cutadapt, followed by globin read removal with bowtie2 v2.4.271. Filtered reads were mapped and quantified to the RM genome (Mmul10, Ensembl v100) with STAR v2.7.572. Gene counts were imported into the R statistical software for subsequent analyses. We first removed lowly expressed genes, then normalized the filtered counts using TMM normalization73 followed by voom transformation74. Differential expression analyses were performed with limma and EdgeR, testing for changes in expression within each group (protected and nonprotected), at each time point post-vaccination relative to baseline (adj p value < 0.05 using Benjamini & Hochberg method, absolute log2 fold change >1.5). A previous set of 122 genes had been identified as important for protection in CMV vaccine that conveyed protection against SIV29. We plot the LFC of these genes in using heatmap.2 clustered with the same methods outlined above.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Data availability The bulk sequencing data has been deposited in GEO (GSE268204) and analysis code has been deposited in a Github repository and can be accessed via this link: https://github.com/galelab/Sacha_CyCMV-FLU_2024. The code for auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) for body temperature is available at https://github.com/ReedLabatPitt/Reed-Lab-Code-Library. Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesTenforde, M. W. et al. Effect of Antigenic Drift on Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in the United States-2019-2020. Clin. Infect. Dis. 73, e4244–e4250 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Martins, J. P., Santos, M., Martins, A., Felgueiras, M. & Santos, R. Seasonal Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness in Persons Aged 15-64 Years: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Vaccines (Basel) 11, 1322 (2023).Article PubMed Google Scholar Organization, W. H. Cumulative number of confirmed human cases for avian influenza A(H5N1) reported to WHO, 2003-2023, 14 July 2023. https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/cumulative-number-of-confirmed-human-cases-for-avian-influenza-a.CDC. Current Bird Flu Situation in Wild Birds. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/avianflu/wildbirds.htm.Imai, M. et al. Experimental adaptation of an influenza H5 HA confers respiratory droplet transmission to a reassortant H5 HA/H1N1 virus in ferrets. Nature 486, 420–428 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Herfst, S. et al. Airborne transmission of influenza A/H5N1 virus between ferrets. Science 336, 1534–1541 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Russell, C. A. et al. The potential for respiratory droplet-transmissible A/H5N1 influenza virus to evolve in a mammalian host. Science 336, 1541–1547 (2012).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Uyeki, T. M. et al. Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus Infection in a Dairy Farm Worker. N. Engl. J. Med. 390, 2028–2029 (2024).ElHefnawi, M. et al. Identification of novel conserved functional motifs across most Influenza A viral strains. Virol. J. 8, 44 (2011).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wilkinson, T. M. et al. Preexisting influenza-specific CD4+ T cells correlate with disease protection against influenza challenge in humans. Nat. Med. 18, 274–280 (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Grant, E. J. et al. Broad CD8+ T cell cross-recognition of distinct influenza A strains in humans. Nat. Commun. 9, 5427 (2018).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sridhar, S. et al. Cellular immune correlates of protection against symptomatic pandemic influenza. Nat. Med. 19, 1305–1312 (2013).Neidleman, J., et al. mRNA vaccine-induced T cells respond identically to SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern but differ in longevity and homing properties depending on prior infection status. Elife 10, 1–28 (2021).Brasu, N. et al. Memory CD8+ T cell diversity and B cell responses correlate with protection against SARS-CoV-2 following mRNA vaccination. Nat. Immunol. 23, 1445–1456 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Klenerman, P. & Oxenius, A. T cell responses to cytomegalovirus. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 367–377 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Karlsson Hedestam, G. B. et al. The challenges of eliciting neutralizing antibodies to HIV-1 and to influenza virus. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6, 143–155 (2008).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Myeloid cell tropism enables MHC-E-restricted CD8+ T cell priming and vaccine efficacy by the RhCMV/SIV vaccine. Sci. Immunol. 7, eabn9301 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Malouli, D. et al. Cytomegaloviral determinants of CD8+ T cell programming and RhCMV/SIV vaccine efficacy. Sci. Immunol. 6, eabg5413 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Picker, L. J., Lifson, J. D., Gale, M., Hansen, S. G. & Früh, K. Programming cytomegalovirus as an HIV vaccine. Trends Immunol. 44, 287–304 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Broadly targeted CD8+ T cell responses restricted by major histocompatibility complex E. Science 351, 714–720 (2016).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Verweij, M. C. et al. Modulation of MHC-E transport by viral decoy ligands is required for RhCMV/SIV vaccine efficacy. Science 372, eabe9233 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Prevention of tuberculosis in rhesus macaques by a cytomegalovirus-based vaccine. Nat. Med. 24, 130–143 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Effector memory T cell responses are associated with protection of rhesus monkeys from mucosal simian immunodeficiency virus challenge. Nat. Med. 15, 293–299 (2009).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Profound early control of highly pathogenic SIV by an effector memory T-cell vaccine. Nature 473, 523–527 (2011).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. A live-attenuated RhCMV/SIV vaccine shows long-term efficacy against heterologous SIV challenge. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw2607 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar NIH. Clinical trial of HIV vaccine begins in United States and South Africa. https://www.nih.govews-eventsews-releases/clinical-trial-hiv-vaccine-begins-united-states-south-africa.Wonderlich, E. R. et al. Widespread Virus Replication in Alveoli Drives Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome in Aerosolized H5N1 Influenza Infection of Macaques. J. Immunol. 198, 1616–1626 (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Burwitz, B. J. et al. Cross-Species Rhesus Cytomegalovirus Infection of Cynomolgus Macaques. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1006014 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Malouli, D. et al. Cytomegalovirus-vaccine-induced unconventional T cell priming and control of SIV replication is conserved between primate species. Cell Host Microbe 30, 1207–1218.e7 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Marshall, E. E. et al. Enhancing safety of cytomegalovirus-based vaccine vectors by engaging host intrinsic immunity. Sci. Transl. Med. 11, eaaw2603 (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Harriff, M. J. et al. Human Lung Epithelial Cells Contain Mycobacterium tuberculosis in a Late Endosomal Vacuole and Are Efficiently Recognized by CD8+ T Cells. PLoS One 9, e97515 (2014).Article ADS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cunningham, A. C. et al. Constitutive expression of MHC and adhesion molecules by alveolar epithelial cells (type II pneumocytes) isolated from human lung and comparison with immunocytochemical findings. J. Cell Sci. 107, 443–449 (1994).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Doucet, J. D. et al. Endogenously expressed matrix protein M1 and nucleoprotein of influenza A are efficiently presented by class I and class II major histocompatibility complexes. J. Gen. Virol. 92, 1162–1171 (2011).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Weinheimer, V. K. et al. Influenza A viruses target type II pneumocytes in the human lung. J. Infect. Dis. 206, 1685–1694 (2012).Article PubMed Google Scholar Heiny, A. T. et al. Evolutionarily conserved protein sequences of influenza a viruses, avian and human, as vaccine targets. PLoS One 2, e1190 (2007).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Barrenäs, F. et al. Interleukin-15 response signature predicts RhCMV/SIV vaccine efficacy. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009278 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Garcia-Beltran, W. F. et al. Multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants escape neutralization by vaccine-induced humoral immunity. Cell. 184, 2372–2383.e9 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zheng, X. et al. Mucosal CD8+ T cell responses induced by an MCMV based vaccine vector confer protection against influenza challenge. PLoS Pathog. 15, e1008036 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kim, Y. et al. MCMV-based vaccine vectors expressing full-length viral proteins provide long-term humoral immune protection upon a single-shot vaccination. Cell Mol. Immunol. 19, 234–244 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Evasion of CD8+ T cells is critical for superinfection by cytomegalovirus. Science 328, 102–106 (2010).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sylwester, A. W. et al. Broadly targeted human cytomegalovirus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells dominate the memory compartments of exposed subjects. J. Exp. Med. 202, 673–685 (2005).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Teijaro, J. R., Verhoeven, D., Page, C. A., Turner, D. & Farber, D. L. Memory CD4 T cells direct protective responses to influenza virus in the lungs through helper-independent mechanisms. J. Virol. 84, 9217–9226 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Eliasson, D. G. et al. M2e-tetramer-specific memory CD4 T cells are broadly protective against influenza infection. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 273–289 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Valkenburg, S. A. et al. IL-15 adjuvanted multivalent vaccinia-based universal influenza vaccine requires CD4+ T cells for heterosubtypic protection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 5676–5681 (2014).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Valkenburg, S. A. et al. Protection by universal influenza vaccine is mediated by memory CD4 T cells. Vaccine 36, 4198–4206 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar McKinstry, K. K. et al. Memory CD4+ T cells protect against influenza through multiple synergizing mechanisms. J. Clin. Invest 122, 2847–2856 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Strutt, T. M. et al. IL-15 supports the generation of protective lung-resident memory CD4 T cells. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 668–680 (2018).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Devarajan, P. et al. Cytotoxic CD4 development requires CD4 effectors to concurrently recognize local antigen and encounter type I IFN-induced IL-15. Cell. Rep. 42, 113429 (2023).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Jost, S. et al. Antigen-specific memory NK cell responses against HIV and influenza use the NKG2/HLA-E axis. Sci. Immunol. 8, eadi3974 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hogan, M. J. et al. Cryptic MHC-E epitope from influenza elicits a potent cytolytic T cell response. Nat. Immunol. 24, 1933–1946 (2023).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sturgill, E. R. et al. Natural Killer Cell Evasion Is Essential for Infection by Rhesus Cytomegalovirus. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005868 (2016).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, H. L. et al. The Role of MHC-E in T Cell Immunity Is Conserved among Humans, Rhesus Macaques, and Cynomolgus Macaques. J. Immunol. 1, 49–60 (2017).Caposio, P. et al. Characterization of a live-attenuated HCMV-based vaccine platform. Sci. Rep. 9, 19236 (2019).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Malouli, D. et al. Cytomegalovirus pp65 limits dissemination but is dispensable for persistence. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 1928–1944 (2014).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Kanekiyo, M. et al. Refined semi-lethal aerosol H5N1 influenza model in cynomolgus macaques for evaluation of medical countermeasures. iScience 26, 107830 (2023).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bowling, J. D., O’Malley, K. J., Klimstra, W. B., Hartman, A. L. & Reed, D. S. A Vibrating Mesh Nebulizer as an Alternative to the Collison Three-Jet Nebulizer for Infectious Disease Aerobiology. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 85, e00747–19 (2019).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bohannon, J. K. et al. Comparison of respiratory inductive plethysmography versus head-out plethysmography for anesthetized nonhuman primates in an animal biosafety level 4 facility. Inhal. Toxicol. 28, 670–676 (2016).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Toussie, D. et al. Clinical and Chest Radiography Features Determine Patient Outcomes in Young and Middle-aged Adults with COVID-19. Radiology 297, E197–E206 (2020).Article PubMed Google Scholar Albe, J. R. et al. Physiological and immunological changes in the brain associated with lethal eastern equine encephalitis virus in macaques. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009308 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ma, H. et al. Electrocardiography Abnormalities in Macaques after Infection with Encephalitic Alphaviruses. Pathogens 8, 240 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, H. L. et al. Allogeneic immunity clears latent virus following allogeneic stem cell transplantation in SIV-infected ART-suppressed macaques. Immunity 56, 1649–1663.e5 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wu, H. L. et al. Terumo spectra optia leukapheresis of cynomolgus macaques for hematopoietic stem cell and T cell collection. J. Clin. Apher. 1, 67–77 (2020).Wu, H. L. et al. Viral opportunistic infections in Mauritian cynomolgus macaques undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplantation mirror human transplant infectious disease complications. Xenotransplantation 4, e12578. (2020).Fujita, T. et al. Expansion of dysfunctional Tim-3-expressing effector memory CD8+ T cells during simian immunodeficiency virus infection in rhesus macaques. J. Immunol. 193, 5576–5583 (2014).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sacha, J. B. et al. Differential antigen presentation kinetics of CD8+ T-cell epitopes derived from the same viral protein. J. Virol. 82, 9293–9298 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tewari, K., Sacha, J., Gao, X. & Suresh, M. Effect of chronic viral infection on epitope selection, cytokine production, and surface phenotype of CD8 T cells and the role of IFN-gamma receptor in immune regulation. J. Immunol. 172, 1491–1500 (2004).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Vojnov, L. et al. The majority of freshly sorted simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)-specific CD8(+) T cells cannot suppress viral replication in SIV-infected macrophages. J. Virol. 86, 4682–4687 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Immune clearance of highly pathogenic SIV infection. Nature 502, 100–104 (2013).Article ADS CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hansen, S. G. et al. Addendum: Immune clearance of highly pathogenic SIV infection. Nature 547, 123–124 (2017).Article ADS CAS PubMed Google Scholar Sievers, F. et al. Fast, scalable generation of high-quality protein multiple sequence alignments using Clustal Omega. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 539 (2011).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Robinson, M. D. & Oshlack, A. A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 11, R25 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Law, C. W., Chen, Y., Shi, W. & Smyth, G. K. voom: Precision weights unlock linear model analysis tools for RNA-seq read counts. Genome Biol. 15, R29 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Grand Challenges grant OPP1213553 to JBS, and R01 AI40888 to J.B.S. and S.G.H., and with support from P51 OD011092 from the NIH Office of the Director to the Oregon National Primate Research Center (ONPRC P51 Core grant, which supports salary for J.B.S., S.G.H., K.F., and L.J.P.). The RNA sequencing assay was performed by the WaNPRC Seattle Genomics service core. Funding for Seattle Genomics is supported in part by the National Institutes of Health, Office of the Director P51OD010425 (M.G.J.). We thank members of the ONPRC Virology Core for production of CMV vectors. The following reagents were obtained through the International Reagent Resource, Influenza Division, WHO Collaborating Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology and Control of Influenza, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA: BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1), FR-736, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Bangladesh/3002/2015 (H1N1)pdm09, FR-1458, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Shanghai/2/2013 (H7N9), FR-1390, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Sichuan/26221/2014 (H5N6), FR-1433, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Hong Kong/33982/2009 (H9N2), FR-775, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Ohio/02/2012 (H3N2), FR-1144, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9), FR-1283, BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/pheasant/New Jersey/1355/1998 (H5N2), FR-912, and BPL-Inactivated Influenza A Virus, A/mallard/Netherlands/12/2000 (H7N7), FR-914.Author informationAuthor notesThese authors contributed equally: Daniel Malouli, Meenakshi Tiwary.These authors jointly supervised this work: Simon Barratt-Boyes, Douglas S. Reed, Jonah B. Sacha.Authors and AffiliationsOregon National Primate Research Center, Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Beaverton, OR, USADaniel Malouli, Meenakshi Tiwary, Roxanne M. Gilbride, David W. Morrow, Colette M. Hughes, Andrea Selseth, Jason Reed, Yun Yu, Lina Gao, Courtney R. Papen, Husam Taher, Louis J. Picker, Klaus Früh, Scott G. Hansen & Jonah B. SachaTulane National Primate Research Center, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USAToni Penney, Pyone P. Aye, Faith Schiro, Jason P. Dufour & Nicholas J. ManessDepartment of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Pittsburgh, PA, USAPriscila Castanha, Megan Wallace, Yulia Yeung, Connor Williams & Simon Barratt-BoyesCenter for Vaccine Research, Pittsburgh, PA, USAMorgan Midgett, Amanda Laughlin, Jeneveve Lundy & Douglas S. ReedDepartment of Diagnostic Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USAGabin Yun & Luke TreasterCenter for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USAJennifer Tisoncik-Go, Leanne S. Whitmore & Michael Gale JrWashington National Primate Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98195, USAMichael Gale JrAuthorsDaniel MalouliView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMeenakshi TiwaryView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarRoxanne M. GilbrideView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDavid W. MorrowView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarColette M. HughesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAndrea SelsethView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarToni PenneyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPriscila CastanhaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMegan WallaceView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYulia YeungView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMorgan MidgettView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarConnor WilliamsView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJason ReedView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarYun YuView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLina GaoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarGabin YunView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLuke TreasterView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAmanda LaughlinView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJeneveve LundyView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJennifer Tisoncik-GoView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLeanne S. WhitmoreView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPyone P. AyeView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarFaith SchiroView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJason P. DufourView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCourtney R. PapenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarHusam TaherView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLouis J. PickerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarKlaus FrühView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMichael Gale JrView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarNicholas J. ManessView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarScott G. HansenView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSimon Barratt-BoyesView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarDouglas S. ReedView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJonah B. SachaView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsDM and MT contributed equally as co-first authors. DM, CRP, and HT constructed, validated, and produced the CyCMV vaccine vectors overseen by KF and LJP. RMG, DWM, CMH, JR, and AS measured T cell responses ex vivo overseen by SGH. TP, PPA, FS, and JPD performed animal work during the vaccine phase, overseen by NJM. PC, MW, YY, MM, CW, GY, AL, and JL performed animal work and analyzed data during the challenge phase overseen by SB-B and DSR. LT analyzed blinded radiographs. YY and LG performed statistical analyses. JT-G and LSW generated and performed transcriptomic analyses under the supervision of MGJr. JBS conceived of the project, secured funding, and supervised the study. JBS wrote the manuscript with help from SGH, SB-B, and DSR. All authors read and commented on the manuscript.Corresponding authorsCorrespondence to Simon Barratt-Boyes, Douglas S. Reed or Jonah B. Sacha.Ethics declarations Competing interests O.H.S.U. and D.M., K.F., L.J.P., S.G.H., and J.B.S. have a significant financial interest in Vir Biotechnology, Inc., a company that may have a financial interest in the results of this research and technology. This potential individual and institutional conflict of interest has been reviewed and managed by O.H.S.U. The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Yasushi Itoh, Jennifer Juno, and the other, anonymous, reviewer for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary informationSupplementary InformationPeer Review FileDescription of Additional Supplementary FilesSupplementary Data 1Reporting SummarySource dataSource DataRights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleMalouli, D., Tiwary, M., Gilbride, R.M. et al. Cytomegalovirus vaccine vector-induced effector memory CD4 + T cells protect cynomolgus macaques from lethal aerosolized heterologous avian influenza challenge. Nat Commun 15, 6007 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-50345-6Download citationReceived: 19 February 2024Accepted: 08 July 2024Published: 19 July 2024DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-50345-6Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Download PDF Associated content Collection Next-generation vaccines for infectious diseases Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Editors Journal Information Open Access Fees and Funding Calls for Papers Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Editors' Highlights Contact Editorial policies Top Articles Publish with us For authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Communications (Nat Commun) ISSN 2041-1723 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational ResearchMHC class II proteins mediate sialic acid independent entry of human and avian H2N2 influenza A viruses | Nature Microbiology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature microbiology articles article Article Published: 15 July 2024 MHC class II proteins mediate sialic acid independent entry of human and avian H2N2 influenza A viruses Umut Karakus1,2,3, Milagros Sempere Borau ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6614-50991, Patricia Martínez-Barragán ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0004-7455-42061, Josephine von Kempis ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0006-4404-45091, Soner Yildiz2,3, Laura M. Arroyo-Fernández ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0698-11321, Marie O. Pohl1, Julia A. Steiger ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0007-1856-80581, Irina Glas ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-6976-63601, Annika Hunziker1, Adolfo García-Sastre ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-6551-18272,3,4,5,6,7 & …Silke Stertz ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-9491-28921 Show authors Nature Microbiology volume 9, pages 2626–2641 (2024)Cite this article 2640 Accesses 187 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Influenza virusVirus–host interactions AbstractInfluenza A viruses (IAV) pose substantial burden on human and animal health. Avian, swine and human IAV bind sialic acid on host glycans as receptor, whereas some bat IAV require MHC class II complexes for cell entry. It is unknown how this difference evolved and whether dual receptor specificity is possible. Here we show that human H2N2 IAV and related avian H2N2 possess dual receptor specificity in cell lines and primary human airway cultures. Using sialylation-deficient cells, we reveal that entry via MHC class II is independent of sialic acid. We find that MHC class II from humans, pigs, ducks, swans and chickens but not bats can mediate H2 IAV entry and that this is conserved in Eurasian avian H2. Our results demonstrate that IAV can possess dual receptor specificity for sialic acid and MHC class II, and suggest a role for MHC class II-dependent entry in zoonotic IAV infections. Access through your institution Buy or subscribe This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscribe to this journal Receive 12 digital issues and online access to articles 111,21 € per year only 9,27 € per issue Learn more Buy this article Purchase on SpringerLink Instant access to full article PDF Buy now Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Fig. 1: HLA-DR expression boosts H2N2 IAV entry and infection.Fig. 2: HLA-DR-mediated binding and entry of H2N2 IAV is independent of sialic acid.Fig. 3: Use of MHC-II from multiple species as alternative entry receptor is shared between bat IAV and distinct H2N2 IAV strains.Fig. 4: S107, K119 and R121 are required for MHC-II-dependent entry in H2.Fig. 5: MHC-II entry competence of avian H2 IAV correlates with replication fitness in mammalian cells.Fig. 6: MHC-II-dependent entry of avian H2 IAV occurs in primary airway epithelial cells and macrophages. Similar content being viewed by others Human-type sialic acid receptors contribute to avian influenza A virus binding and entry by hetero-multivalent interactions Article Open access 13 July 2022 Cell-penetrating peptide-mediated cell entry of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza virus Article Open access 22 October 2020 Receptome profiling identifies KREMEN1 and ASGR1 as alternative functional receptors of SARS-CoV-2 Article 26 November 2021 Data availability All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information files, except for the results of the single-cell RNA sequencing. These are available in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus repository under accession number GSE264198. In addition, the following databases were used: Influenza Research Database (https://www.bv-brc.org/view/Taxonomy/11308), GISAID (gisaid.org), NCBI (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and PDB (rcsb.org). Source data are provided with this paper. ReferencesLong, J. S., Mistry, B., Haslam, S. M. & Barclay, W. S. Host and viral determinants of influenza A virus species specificity. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 67–81 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Schrauwen, E. J. & Fouchier, R. A. Host adaptation and transmission of influenza A viruses in mammals. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 3, e9 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Imai, M. & Kawaoka, Y. The role of receptor binding specificity in interspecies transmission of influenza viruses. Curr. Opin. Virol. 2, 160–167 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gamblin, S. J. et al. Hemagglutinin structure and activities. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a038638 (2021).Gottschalk, A. On the mechanism underlying initiation of influenza virus infection. Ergeb. Mikrobiol. Immunitatsforsch. Exp. Ther. 32, 1–22 (1959).CAS PubMed Google Scholar Rogers, G. N. & Paulson, J. C. Receptor determinants of human and animal influenza virus isolates: differences in receptor specificity of the H3 hemagglutinin based on species of origin. Virology 127, 361–373 (1983).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Carroll, S. M. & Paulson, J. C. Differential infection of receptor-modified host cells by receptor-specific influenza viruses. Virus Res. 3, 165–179 (1985).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Stevens, J. et al. Glycan microarray analysis of the hemagglutinins from modern and pandemic influenza viruses reveals different receptor specificities. J. Mol. Biol. 355, 1143–1155 (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Gambaryan, A. S. et al. Specification of receptor-binding phenotypes of influenza virus isolates from different hosts using synthetic sialylglycopolymers: non-egg-adapted human H1 and H3 influenza A and influenza B viruses share a common high binding affinity for 6’-sialyl(N-acetyllactosamine). Virology 232, 345–350 (1997).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Matrosovich, M. N. et al. Avian influenza A viruses differ from human viruses by recognition of sialyloligosaccharides and gangliosides and by a higher conservation of the HA receptor-binding site. Virology 233, 224–234 (1997).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Zhu, X. et al. Hemagglutinin homologue from H17N10 bat influenza virus exhibits divergent receptor-binding and pH-dependent fusion activities. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 1458–1463 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sun, X. et al. Bat-derived influenza hemagglutinin H17 does not bind canonical avian or human receptors and most likely uses a unique entry mechanism. Cell Rep. 3, 769–778 (2013).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tong, S. et al. New world bats harbor diverse influenza A viruses. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003657 (2013).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tong, S. et al. A distinct lineage of influenza A virus from bats. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 4269–4274 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Karakus, U. et al. MHC class II proteins mediate cross-species entry of bat influenza viruses. Nature 567, 109–112 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ciminski, K., Pfaff, F., Beer, M. & Schwemmle, M. Bats reveal the true power of influenza A virus adaptability. PLoS Pathog. 16, e1008384 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Connor, R. J., Kawaoka, Y., Webster, R. G. & Paulson, J. C. Receptor specificity in human, avian, and equine H2 and H3 influenza virus isolates. Virology 205, 17–23 (1994).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Han, J. et al. Genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen identifies host factors essential for influenza virus replication. Cell Rep. 23, 596–607 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Murakami, S. et al. Enhanced growth of influenza vaccine seed viruses in Vero cells mediated by broadening the optimal pH range for virus membrane fusion. J. Virol. 86, 1405–1410 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Olajide, O. M. et al. Evolutionarily conserved amino acids in MHC-II mediate bat influenza A virus entry into human cells. PLoS Biol. 21, e3002182 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Jones, J. C. et al. Risk assessment of H2N2 influenza viruses from the avian reservoir. J. Virol. 88, 1175–1188 (2014).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Krause, J. C. et al. Human monoclonal antibodies to pandemic 1957 H2N2 and pandemic 1968 H3N2 influenza viruses. J. Virol. 86, 6334–6340 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Cline, T. D., Karlsson, E. A., Seufzer, B. J. & Schultz-Cherry, S. The hemagglutinin protein of highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza viruses overcomes an early block in the replication cycle to promote productive replication in macrophages. J. Virol. 87, 1411–1419 (2013).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Riser, B. L. & Maassab, H. F. Differential interaction of virulent and attenuated influenza virus strains with ferret alveolar macrophages: possible role in pathogenicity. J. Infect. Dis. 161, 699–705 (1990).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Forrester, M. A. et al. Similarities and differences in surface receptor expression by THP-1 monocytes and differentiated macrophages polarized using seven different conditioning regimens. Cell Immunol. 332, 58–76 (2018).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Genin, M., Clement, F., Fattaccioli, A., Raes, M. & Michiels, C. M1 and M2 macrophages derived from THP-1 cells differentially modulate the response of cancer cells to etoposide. BMC Cancer 15, 577 (2015).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Karakus, U. et al. H19 influenza A virus exhibits species-specific MHC class II receptor usage. Cell Host Microbe https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2024.05.018 (2024).Pappas, C. et al. Assessment of transmission, pathogenesis and adaptation of H2 subtype influenza viruses in ferrets. Virology 477, 61–71 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lenny, B. J. et al. Evaluation of multivalent H2 influenza pandemic vaccines in mice. Vaccine 35, 1455–1463 (2017).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martínez-Sobrido, L. & García-Sastre, A. Generation of recombinant influenza virus from plasmid DNA. J. Vis. Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/2057 (2010).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Hai, R. et al. Influenza A(H7N9) virus gains neuraminidase inhibitor resistance without loss of in vivo virulence or transmissibility. Nat. Commun. 4, 2854 (2013).Article PubMed Google Scholar Steel, J. et al. Live attenuated influenza viruses containing NS1 truncations as vaccine candidates against H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza. J. Virol. 83, 1742–1753 (2009).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Pugach, P. et al. HIV-1 clones resistant to a small molecule CCR5 inhibitor use the inhibitor-bound form of CCR5 for entry. Virology 361, 212–228 (2007).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Tscherne, D. M., Manicassamy, B. & Garcia-Sastre, A. An enzymatic virus-like particle assay for sensitive detection of virus entry. J. Virol. Methods 163, 336–343 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Whitt, M. A. Generation of VSV pseudotypes using recombinant DeltaG-VSV for studies on virus entry, identification of entry inhibitors, and immune responses to vaccines. J. Virol. Methods 169, 365–374 (2010).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Madeira, F. et al. The EMBL-EBI search and sequence analysis tools APIs in 2019. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, W636–W641 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Khare, S. et al. GISAID’s role in pandemic response. China CDC Wkly 3, 1049–1051 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar de Castro, E. et al. ScanProsite: detection of PROSITE signature matches and ProRule-associated functional and structural residues in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, W362–W365 (2006).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Prescott, R. A. et al. A comparative study of in vitro air-liquid interface culture models of the human airway epithelium evaluating cellular heterogeneity and gene expression at single cell resolution. Respir. Res. 24, 213 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Zepp, J. A. & Morrisey, E. E. Cellular crosstalk in the development and regeneration of the respiratory system. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 551–566 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA sequencing. Nature 587, 619–625 (2020).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bonser, L. R. et al. Flow-cytometric analysis and purification of airway epithelial-cell subsets. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 64, 308–317 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Wyrzucki, A., Bianchi, M., Kohler, I., Steck, M. & Hangartner, L. Heterosubtypic antibodies to influenza A virus have limited activity against cell-bound virus but are not impaired by strain-specific serum antibodies. J. Virol. 89, 3136–3144 (2015).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hurskainen, M. et al. Single cell transcriptomic analysis of murine lung development on hyperoxia-induced damage. Nat. Commun. 12, 1565 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Xu, R., McBride, R., Paulson, J. C., Basler, C. F. & Wilson, I. A. Structure, receptor binding, and antigenicity of influenza virus hemagglutinins from the 1957 H2N2 pandemic. J. Virol. 84, 1715–1721 (2010).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Download referencesAcknowledgementsThis work was supported by a grant from the Swiss National Science Foundation (310030_204166) and the Novartis Foundation for Medical–Biological Research (18C190) to S.S. U.K. received funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation Postdoc.Mobility fellowship (P500PB_206818). S.Y. received funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation Postdoc.Mobility fellowship (P400PB_199292). This work was also partly funded by CRIPT (Center for Research on Influenza Pathogenesis and Transmission), an NIAID-funded Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (CEIRR; contract no. 75N93021C00014) and by NIAID grants U19AI142733 and U19AI168631 to A.G.-S. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the paper.THP-1 cells were a kind gift from S. Chanda (Scripps Research, La Jolla, California, USA); A/Chicken/Jena/4705/1984 from R. Webby (St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA); expression vectors pCAGGS-H2-JP57 and pCAGGS-N2-JP57 from B.G. Hale (University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland) and the monoclonal antibody 8F8 from J. Crowe (Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA).Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsInstitute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, SwitzerlandUmut Karakus, Milagros Sempere Borau, Patricia Martínez-Barragán, Josephine von Kempis, Laura M. Arroyo-Fernández, Marie O. Pohl, Julia A. Steiger, Irina Glas, Annika Hunziker & Silke StertzDepartment of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAUmut Karakus, Soner Yildiz & Adolfo García-SastreGlobal Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAUmut Karakus, Soner Yildiz & Adolfo García-SastreDepartment of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAAdolfo García-SastreThe Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAAdolfo García-SastreDepartment of Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAAdolfo García-SastreThe Icahn Genomics Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USAAdolfo García-SastreAuthorsUmut KarakusView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMilagros Sempere BorauView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarPatricia Martínez-BarragánView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJosephine von KempisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSoner YildizView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarLaura M. Arroyo-FernándezView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMarie O. PohlView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJulia A. SteigerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarIrina GlasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnnika HunzikerView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAdolfo García-SastreView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSilke StertzView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsU.K., M.S.B., P.M.-B., J.v.K., S.Y., L.M.A.-F., M.O.P., J.A.S., I.G. and A.H. performed experiments; U.K., M.S.B., P.M.-B., J.v.K., L.M.A.-.F, M.O.P. and S.S. designed experiments; A.G.-S. and S.S. supervised work and acquired funding; U.K., M.S.B., P.M.-B., J.v.K. and S.S. wrote the paper.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Silke Stertz.Ethics declarations Competing interests The A.G.-S. laboratory has received research support from Pfizer, Senhwa Biosciences, Kenall Manufacturing, Avimex, Johnson & Johnson, Dynavax, 7Hills Pharma, Pharmamar, ImmunityBio, Accurius, Nanocomposix, Hexamer, N-fold LLC, Model Medicines, Atea Pharma, Applied Biological Laboratories and Merck, outside of the reported work. A.G.-S. has consulting agreements for the following companies involving cash and/or stock: Vivaldi Biosciences, Contrafect, 7Hills Pharma, Avimex, Vaxalto, Pagoda, Accurius, Esperovax, Farmak, Applied Biological Laboratories, Pharmamar, Paratus, CureLab Oncology, CureLab Veterinary, Synairgen and Pfizer, outside of the reported work. A.G.-S. has been an invited speaker in meeting events organized by Seqirus, Janssen, Abbott and Astrazeneca. A.G.-S. is inventor on patents and patent applications on the use of antivirals and vaccines for the treatment and prevention of virus infections and cancer, owned by the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, outside of the reported work. The other authors declare no competing interests. Peer review Peer review information Nature Microbiology thanks Joakim Dahlin and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available. Additional informationPublisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Extended dataExtended Data Fig. 1 HLA-DR expression boosts H2N2 IAV entry.a) Calu-3 HLA-DRA knockout (KO) cells were transduced with lentivirus encoding HLA-DRA (LV-HLA-DRA) or control lentivirus (LV-ctrl). Surface levels of HLA-DR were analyzed by flow cytometry. Representative histograms from n = 3 independent experiments. b) Cells from a were infected with different dilutions of H1N1 (A/WSN/33)- or H2N2 (A/JP/305/57)-pseudotyped HIV-based luciferase-encoding VLPs. At 72 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured. c) Cells from a were left untreated (grey bars) or treated with sialidase (200 mU/ml; white bars). Surface levels of α2,3- and α2,6-linked sialic acids (SA) were determined. d) Cells described in a were infected with β-lactamase-M1 fusion-protein (BlaM1) VLPs pseudotyped with H1N1 (A/WSN/33), H2N2 (A/JP/305/57) or left uninfected. At 5 h post infection, entry-positive cells were quantified. e) MDCK II cells transduced with lentivirus encoding alpha- and beta-chains of HLA-DR (LV-HLA-DR) or control lentivirus (LV-ctrl) were infected with luciferase-encoding HIV-based VLPs pseudotyped with H1N1 (A/WSN/33), H2N2 (A/JP/305/57) or H3N2 (A/HK/1/68). At 72 h post infection luciferase activity was measured. f) Cells from a and e were analyzed for HLA-DR surface levels by flow cytometry. Representative histogram from n = 3 independent experiments. g) MDCK II LV-HLA-DR cells were treated with no, anti-His or anti-MHC-II antibody and infected with H1N1 (A/WSN/33)-, H2N2 (A/JP/305/57)- or H18 (A/Bat/Peru/33/10)-pseudotyped HIV-based luciferase-encoding VLPs in the presence of the antibodies. At 72 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured. b-e, g) Data are means ± s.d from n = 3 independent experiments. b, d, e, g) Statistical significance was determined by unpaired t-test (two-tailed), *P ≤ 0.05 **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001; ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data. c) Statistical significance was determined by one-sample t-test (two-tailed) compared to a theoretical mean of 100; ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data. b, e) Dashed line indicates the detection limit.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 2 HLA-DR-mediated binding and entry of H2N2 IAV is independent of sialic acid.a) Parental Calu-3 and Calu-3 HLA-DRA/SLC35A1 double knockout cells were infected with H1N1 (A/Brisbane/59/2007)-, H3N2 (A/Hong Kong/2286/2017)- or H2N2 (A/Taiwan/1/64)-pseudotyped luciferase-encoding HIV-based VLPs. At 72 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured as a readout for VLP entry. b) Surface levels of HLA-DR were analyzed by flow cytometry on parental Calu-3, Calu-3 HLA-DRA/SLC35A1 double knockout cells and Calu-3 HLA-DRA/SLC35A1 double knockout cells transduced with lentivirus encoding HLA-DR alpha- and beta-chains (LV-HLA-DR). Representative histograms from n = 2 independent experiments are shown. c) Cells from b were infected with H2N2 (A/JP/305/57)-pseudotyped HIV-based luciferase-encoding HIV-based VLPs. At 72 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured as a readout for VLP entry. a, c) Data are means ± s.d from n = 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired t-test (two-tailed), *P ≤ 0.05 **P ≤ 0.01; ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data. Dashed lines indicate the detection limit. d) Calu-3 HLA-DRA/SLC35A1 double knockout cells transduced with lentivirus encoding HLA-DR alpha- and beta-chains (LV-HLA-DR) or control lentivirus (LV-ctrl) were co-transfected with expression plasmids encoding mCherry and the indicated HA subtypes. At 24 h post transfection cells were treated with TPCK-trypsin for HA cleavage followed by incubation at pH=5 for 20 min. Cells were recovered in culture media at 37 °C for 4 h to allow for syncytia formation. Prior to analysis by fluorescence microscopy, cells were fixed, and cell nuclei were stained with DAPI. Representative images from 3 independent experiments are shown. Scale bar, 150 µm.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 3 Use of MHC-II as alternative entry receptor is shared between bat IAV and distinct H2N2 IAV strains.a) Phylogenetic tree of the H2 IAV isolates tested in Figs. 1e and 3c. b) Illustration of the A/JP/305/57 H2 trimer was generated using PyMOL based on crystal structure from PDB file 3ku331. HA monomers and the canonical RBS are highlighted in shades of grey and green, respectively. The 190-helix and the 220- and the 130-loop are highlighted in yellow. Additional amino acids surrounding the RBS are labelled with a-c and highlighted in blue. c) Alignment of the Eurasian avian and the North American avian H2 consensus sequence at the indicated amino acid positions (H2 numbering). d) Calu-3 HLA-DRA knockout cells reconstituted with HLA-DRA (LV-HLA-DRA) or control cells (LV-ctrl) were incubated with A/Mallard/New York/6750/1978 or A/Chicken/Jena/4705/1984 at an MOI of 50 for 90 min on ice. Cell-bound IAV was stained with an H2-specific serum and analyzed via flow cytometry. Following determination of an H2 positive population, the median Alexa Fluor 647 (H2) signal in infected LV-HLA-DRA cells was normalized to that in LV-ctrl cells (left). Data are mean ± s.d. from n = 3 independent experiments. Representative histograms from n = 3 independent experiments are shown (right). e) MDCK II cells transduced with lentivirus encoding alpha- and beta-chains of HLA-DR (LV-HLA-DR) or control lentivirus (LV-ctrl) were inoculated with luciferase-encoding HIV-based VLPs pseudotyped with the glycoproteins from the indicated IAV subtypes. VLPs carrying H6 were generated by co-expression with N1 (A/WSN/33). At 72 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured as a readout for VLP entry. Data are means ± s.d. from n ≥ 3 independent experiments, each performed in triplicates. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired t-test (two-tailed). ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data. Dashed line indicates the detection limit.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 4 Identification of a putative HLA-DR entry motif in H2.a) Protein sequence alignment of H2 A/JP/305/57 and A/Mallard/NY/78 covering amino acids 1-325 with amino acids 91-146 (H2 numbering) highlighted in yellow. b) Calu-3 HLA-DRA knockout cells reconstituted with HLA-DRA (LV-HLA-DRA), or control cells (LV-ctrl) were infected with luciferase-encoding HIV-based VLPs pseudotyped with the indicated chimeric H2 constructs and N2 (A/JP/305/57). At 72 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured as a readout for VLP entry. c) HIV-based luciferase-encoding VLPs were pseudotyped with mutants of A/JP/305/57 or A/Mallard/NY/78 H2 carrying the indicated mutations, together with the corresponding N2, and tested for HLA-DR-dependent entry as described in b. d) Protein sequence alignment of H2 A/JP/305/57, Eurasian and North American avian H2 tested in Fig. 3c covering amino acids 105-123 with amino acids 107, 109, 119 and 121 marked in red. e) HIV-based luciferase-encoding VLPs were pseudotyped with wildtype or mutant HA of A/Chicken/Jena/4705/1984 carrying the indicated mutation, together with the corresponding N2, and tested for HLA-DR-dependent entry as described in b. f) HIV-based luciferase-encoding VLPs were pseudotyped with wildtype or mutant of A/Duck/HongKong/319/1978 carrying the indicated mutation, together with N2 of A/JP/305/57, and tested for HLA-DR-dependent entry as described in b. g) HIV-based luciferase-encoding VLPs were pseudotyped with wildtype or mutant H2 of A/JP/305/57 carrying the indicated mutation, together with the corresponding N2, and tested for HLA-DR-dependent entry as described in b. h) Protein sequence alignment of H2 A/JP/305/57 and the indicated bat IAV strains covering amino acids 105-123. b, c, e-g) Data are means ± s.d. from n = 3 independent experiments, each performed in triplicates. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired t-test (two-tailed). *P ≤ 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01; ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data. Dashed lines indicate the detection limit.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 5 Sialic acid binding site-targeting antibodies can also inhibit HLA-DR-dependent entry.a) Illustration of the A/JP/305/57 H2 trimer based on the crystal structure from PDB file 3ku3 was generated using PyMOL. HA monomers and the canonical RBS are highlighted in shades of grey and green, respectively. The swapped region from chimera no.6 is highlighted in yellow. Residues 119K and 122R required for HLA-DR-dependent entry are highlighted in purple. The antigenic sites surrounding the RBS are highlighted in blue. b) Neutralization curves of luciferase-encoding VSV pseudotyped with H2 A/JP/305/57 or A/Netherlands/B1/68, and N2 from A/JP/305/57 incubated with monoclonal antibody 8F8 at 37 °C for 1 h. The target cells are Calu-3 HLA-DRA knockout control cells (LV-ctrl) or Calu-3 HLA-DRA/SLC35A1 double knockout cells transduced with lentivirus encoding HLA-DR alpha- and beta-chains (LV-HLA-DR). At 7 h post infection, luciferase activity was measured as a readout for VSV-pseudovirus entry. c) Comparative neutralization titer 50 (NT50) calculated from b. Data are means ± s.d. from n = 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by unpaired t-test (two-tailed). *P ≤ 0.05; ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data.Source dataExtended Data Fig. 6 HLA-DR is expressed on secretory and ciliated cells in human primary airway epithelial cultures and can contribute to H2 IAV infection.a) Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plots of the scRNA-seq data highlighting the different cell subtypes. Cell subtype allocation was based on expression of canonical cell subtype specific markers. Basal cells: TP63, KRT5, KRT14; Suprabasal cells: KRT6A, KRT16; Basal differentiating into secretory (BdiS) cells: LY6D; Club cells: SCGB3A1; Goblet cells: MUC5B; Ciliated cells: FOXJ1, CAPS, TP73, CCDC78. b) UMAP plots highlighting the relative expression levels of HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB1 in BEpC. c) Representative dot plots of the gating strategy for determining infected BEpC in Fig. 6a. d) Representative dot plots of the gating strategy for HLA-DR staining in Fig. 6c.Extended Data Fig. 7 HLA-DR-dependent entry contributes to H2 IAV infection in THP-1 derived macrophages of the M1-like phenotype.a) THP-1 cells were stimulated with PMA for 4 d and rested in medium without PMA for 24 h. To generate M0- and M1-like macrophages, cells were maintained in medium only or medium with IFN-γ and LPS for a further 24 h, respectively. Differentiated cells were evaluated through surface marker stains or infected with IAV and analyzed through flow cytometry. Schematic generated with BioRender. b) Surface levels of CD14, HLA-DR, CD36 and CD11c in THP-1 cells, M0- and M1-like macrophages were analyzed with flow cytometry. c) Gating strategy used to determine IAV NP positive cells in Fig. 6e. d) Gating strategy used to determine IAV NP positive cells in Fig. 6f. b, c, d) Representative histograms and dot plots from n = 3 independent experiments are shown. e, f) Balb/c mice were infected with 100’000 PFUs of the indicated viruses or mock infected with PBS. At 1 d post infection lungs were collected and single cell suspensions were stained for IAV-NP, CD11b, CD11c and MHC-II and analyzed by flow cytometry. Infected cells were determined by measuring NP positive cells (e). NP positive cells in e expressing the indicated surface markers were quantified (f). Statistical significance was determined by two-way Anova with Sidak’s multiple comparison test. **P ≤ 0.01, ****P ≤ 0.0001; ns, not significant. Exact p-values are available in Source Data. Data are means ± s.d. from n = 4 mice from two independent experiments.Source dataSupplementary informationReporting SummaryPeer Review FileSupplementary Tables 1–3Supplementary Table 1 Prevalence (%) of amino acids S107, K119 and R121 in group 1 HA subtypes. Supplementary Table 2 Risk score of avian H2. Supplementary Table 3 Primer sequences.Source dataSource Data Fig. 1Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 2Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 3Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 4Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 5Statistical source data.Source Data Fig. 6Statistical source data.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 1Statistical source data.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 2Statistical source data.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 3Statistical source data.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 4Statistical source data.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 5Statistical source data.Source Data Extended Data Fig. 7Statistical source data.Rights and permissionsSpringer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleKarakus, U., Sempere Borau, M., Martínez-Barragán, P. et al. MHC class II proteins mediate sialic acid independent entry of human and avian H2N2 influenza A viruses. Nat Microbiol 9, 2626–2641 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-024-01771-1Download citationReceived: 12 April 2024Accepted: 27 June 2024Published: 15 July 2024Issue Date: October 2024DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-024-01771-1Share this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Current issue Collections Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Community Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Microbiology (Nat Microbiol) ISSN 2058-5276 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingImmunological imprinting and risks of influenza B virus infection | Nature Immunology Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature immunology news & views article News & Views Published: 19 July 2024 InfluenzaImmunological imprinting and risks of influenza B virus infection Isaac C. L. Chow1 & Sook-San Wong ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1290-191X1 Nature Immunology volume 25, pages 1319–1321 (2024)Cite this article 993 Accesses 1 Citations 5 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Immunological memoryInfluenza virus An Author Correction to this article was published on 02 October 2024 This article has been updated Immunological imprinting early in life has been proposed to influence the risk of infection by influenza viruses later on — but hard evidence for this has been lacking. A new study now shows how this can occur for influenza B viruses. Access through your institution Buy or subscribe This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.com Buy this article Purchase on SpringerLink Instant access to full article PDF Buy now Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Fig. 1: Circulation history of Influenza viruses and their imprinting patterns. Change history02 October 2024A Correction to this paper has been published: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-024-01996-6ReferencesMiller, E. et al. Lancet 375, 1100–1108 (2010).Article PubMed Google Scholar Arevalo, P., McLean, H. Q., Belongia, E. A. & Cobey, S. Elife 9, https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.50060 (2020).Gostic, K. M. et al. PLoS Pathog 15, e1008109 (2019).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Vieira, M. C. et al. Nat. Commun. 12, 4313 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Edler, P. et al. Nat. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-024-01732-8 (2024).Article PubMed Google Scholar Krammer, F. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 383–397 (2019).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Francis, T. Proc. Am. Philos. Soc. 104, 572–578 (1960). Google Scholar Gostic, K. M., Ambrose, M., Worobey, M. & Lloyd-Smith, J. O. Science 354, 722–726 (2016).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Chen, R. & Holmes, E. C. J. Mol. Evol. 66, 655–663 (2008).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Lessler, J. et al. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002802 (2012).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Tsang, T. K. et al. J. Infect. Dis. 228, 169–172 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar US Food & Drug Administration. https://go.nature.com/4coYLU0 (2024).Download referencesAuthor informationAuthors and AffiliationsPasteur Research Pole, School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SARIsaac C. L. Chow & Sook-San WongAuthorsIsaac C. L. ChowView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarSook-San WongView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarCorresponding authorCorrespondence to Sook-San Wong.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Rights and permissionsReprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleChow, I.C.L., Wong, SS. Immunological imprinting and risks of influenza B virus infection. Nat Immunol 25, 1319–1321 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-024-01906-wDownload citationPublished: 19 July 2024Issue Date: August 2024DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-024-01906-wShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Associated content Immune imprinting in early life shapes cross-reactivity to influenza B virus haemagglutinin Peta EdlerLara S. U. SchwabMarios Koutsakos Nature Microbiology Article 18 Jun 2024 Advertisement Explore content Research articles Reviews & Analysis News & Comment Videos Current issue Collections Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Aims & Scope Journal Information Journal Metrics About the Editors Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Editorial Policies Content Types Web Feeds Posters Contact Publish with us Submission Guidelines For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Immunology (Nat Immunol) ISSN 1529-2916 (online) ISSN 1529-2908 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature BriefingCan H5N1 spread through cow sneezes? Experiment offers clues Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature news article NEWS 16 July 2024 Can H5N1 spread through cow sneezes? Experiment offers clues Study suggests the virus can spread through the respiratory system but infected milk is probably driving the outbreak in the United States. By Smriti Mallapaty Smriti Mallapaty View author publications You can also search for this author in PubMed Google Scholar Twitter Facebook Email Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Cows can get infected with the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 by breathing in virus-laden aerosols, according to a preprint1 posted on bioRxiv. But scientists say this mode of transmission is probably not driving the current outbreak among cattle in the United States. Access options Access through your institution Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription 24,99 € / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscription info for Korean customersWe have a dedicated website for our Korean customers. Please go to natureasia.com to subscribe to this journal.Go to natureasia.comRent or buy this articlePrices vary by article typefrom$1.95to$39.95Learn morePrices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-024-02322-8 ReferencesBaker, A. L. et al. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.12.603337 (2024).Download references Reprints and permissions Related Articles Huge amounts of bird-flu virus found in raw milk of infected cows If bird flu sparks a human pandemic, your past immunity could help Bird flu virus has been spreading among US cows for months, RNA reveals Could bird flu in cows lead to a human outbreak? Slow response worries scientists Bird flu in US cows: where will it end? Subjects Infection Latest on: Infection Animal-to-human viral leap sparked deadly Marburg outbreak News 24 OCT 24 Just widening access to the right drugs won’t solve antimicrobial resistance Correspondence 15 OCT 24 Rwanda’s seven steps in seven days for managing Marburg virus Correspondence 10 OCT 24 Jobs Faculty Position in School of Sustainability The Kotak School of Sustainability at IIT Kanpur, India (https://kss.iitk.ac.in/) a transformative initiative to lead India Kanpur (Locality), Uttar Pradesh (IN) Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur Professor/Associate Professor/Assistant Professor/Senior Lecturer/Lecturer The School of Science and Engineering (SSE) at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen) sincerely invites applications for mul... Shenzhen, China The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK Shenzhen) Professor/Associate Professor/Assistant Professor/Senior Lecturer/Lecturer The School of Science and Engineering (SSE) at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen) sincerely invites applications for mul... Shenzhen, China The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK Shenzhen) High-level Talent Recruitment dedicated to teaching & research College of Water Sciences, Beijing Normal University Beijing, China College of Water Sciences, Beijing Normal University Independent junior research group leader registration number: ZE-0104-mikrokos-nwgl-2024 Entry date: as soon as possible Application deadline: 2024-12-15 Salary: E 15 TV-H Duration: 3 year... 35037, Marburg (DE) Philipps-Universität Marburg Access through your institution Buy or subscribe Access through your institution Change institution Buy or subscribe Related Articles Huge amounts of bird-flu virus found in raw milk of infected cows If bird flu sparks a human pandemic, your past immunity could help Bird flu virus has been spreading among US cows for months, RNA reveals Could bird flu in cows lead to a human outbreak? Slow response worries scientists Bird flu in US cows: where will it end? Subjects Infection Sign up to Nature Briefing An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday. Email address Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Sign up Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing Explore content Research articles News Opinion Research Analysis Careers Books & Culture Podcasts Videos Current issue Browse issues Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Subscribe Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal Journal Staff About the Editors Journal Information Our publishing models Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Awards Contact Editorial policies History of Nature Send a news tip Publish with us For Authors For Referees Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature (Nature) ISSN 1476-4687 (online) ISSN 0028-0836 (print) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature LimitedColorado reports avian flu infections in 5 people who culled sick poultry | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu Colorado reports avian flu infections in 5 people who culled sick poultry Lisa Schnirring Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) NIAID / Flickr cc Share Copied to clipboard The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) has reported five human H5 avian influenza infections in workers who were part of the response to a recent large outbreak at a layer farm, four of which have been confirmed by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).Patients have eye, respiratory symptomsThe patients have mild illness, including conjunctivitis and common respiratory symptoms. None were hospitalized, according to statements from the CDPHE. Though officials haven't said if the virus on the poultry farm is the same as the B3.13 genotype infecting dairy cattle, conjunctivitis has also been reported in four dairy farm workers over the past few months.Last week, the Colorado Department of Agriculture reported an outbreak at a large layer farm in Weld County, where the virus has also struck several dairy herds. The layer farm had 1.78 million birds, the state's second-largest outbreak since H5N1 first emerged in US birds in 2022. The Weld County poultry outbreak recently prompted an emergency declaration from the state's governor, a step that frees up more resources to help with the response.Colorado has been one of the states hit hardest by the virus, with at least 36 H5N1 outbreaks in dairy cows, 23 of them from Weld County.On July 12, the CDPHE reported three presumptive positive cases in poultry farm cullers working at a farm in the northeastern part of the state. It also added that state health officials had collected more samples from other symptomatic workers and that the investigation was ongoing with support from the CDC.'"State epidemiologists suspect the poultry workers’ cases are a result of working directly with infected poultry," the CDPHE said.State epidemiologists suspect the poultry workers’ cases are a result of working directly with infected poultry.Yesterday, the CDPHE upped its number of avian flu detections in poultry cullers to five, noting that the CDC has confirmed four of the infections and that results are pending for the fifth case, classified as a presumptive positive for now.On July 3, the CDPHE reported H5 avian influenza in an adult male dairy farm worker exposed to infected cattle. He had mild symptoms, including conjunctivitis. CDC field team on the ground in ColoradoThe CDC yesterday also weighed in on the new Colorado cases, adding that it would confirm the fifth case when the samples arrive. Genetic sequencing of the virus is under way to determine the neuraminidase of the virus from the poultry workers.It said a multidisciplinary, bilingual field team of nine people has been deployed to Colorado to assist state health officials.The Colorado patients, the first poultry workers to test positive in the United States since 2022, had conjunctivitis, eye tearing, and typical flu symptoms, including fever, chills, cough, and sore throat. "Additional cases may be reported and subsequently confirmed, as monitoring and testing is ongoing," the CDC said.Additional cases may be reported and subsequently confirmed, as monitoring and testing is ongoing.Risk to the public is still considered low, but the spurt of new infections underscores the threat of exposure to infected animals, the CDC said.Since the start of the H5N1 outbreaks in cattle in March, which are occurring alongside sporadic outbreaks in poultry, nine infections have been reported in farm workers, four in dairy workers and five in poultry workers. The most recent human case linked to sick dairy cows was reported from Colorado. Related news Previous Next Studies describe deadly avian flu outbreaks among seals, terns Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen Lisa Schnirring CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Lisa Schnirring California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases Lisa Schnirring Utah reports avian flu in dairy cows as USDA announces plan for bulk milk sampling Lisa Schnirring USDA announces first H5N1 avian flu detection in US pigs Lisa Schnirring H5N1 avian flu isolate from dairy worker is transmissible, lethal in animals Lisa Schnirring This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateUS Invests in Avian Flu Vaccine Candidates This site is intended for healthcare professionals English Edition English New Français New Deutsch New Português New Español New UK New Français New Italiano New RegisterLog In Tuesday, November 12, 2024 Specialty: TODAY ON MEDSCAPE Allergy & ImmunologyAnesthesiologyCardiologyCritical CareDermatologyDiabetes & EndocrinologyEmergency MedicineFamily MedicineGastroenterologyGeneral SurgeryHematology - OncologyHIV/AIDSHospital MedicineInfectious DiseasesInternal MedicineMultispecialtyNephrologyNeurologyOb/Gyn & Women's HealthOncologyOphthalmologyOrthopedicsPathology & Lab MedicinePediatricsPlastic SurgeryPsychiatryPublic HealthPulmonary MedicineRadiologyRheumatologyTransplantationUrologyToday on MedscapeBusiness of MedicineMedical LifestyleScience & TechnologyMedical StudentsNursesPharmacistsResidentsEdition: ENGLISH English New Français New Deutsch New Português New Español New UK New Français New Italiano New Log In Sign Up It's Free! Medscape Medical NewsUS Invests in Avian Flu Vaccine CandidatesMarcia Frellick July 19, 2024 00Two large US investments in human vaccines for the H5N1 avian flu are aimed at improving readiness in the case of a pandemic.The US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, announced it will pay Moderna $176 million to develop an mRNA pandemic influenza vaccine.The announcement came weeks after the government ordered 4.8 million doses of a prepandemic cell-based vaccine, well-matched to the currently circulating H5N1 strain, according to the manufacturer, CSL Seqirus. The doses will be part of the National Pre-Pandemic Influenza Vaccine Stockpile. The cell-based vaccine will need to be approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before distribution.A spokesperson for the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR) told Medscape Medical News that it "has hundreds of thousands of doses that could be deployed within weeks pending regulatory approval by the FDA and is filling approximately 4.8 million additional doses to augment this reserve." Moderna has started its phase 1/2 trial to test the safety of its investigational pandemic influenza vaccine (mRNA-1018) in healthy adults. The study includes antigens against the H5 and H7 avian flu viruses. Results are expected later this year, Moderna said in a news release. According to the company, the $176 million in funding will support the late-stage development of the vaccine. Dawn O'Connell, assistant secretary for preparedness and response at HHS, said Moderna's phase 3 trials could begin in 2025. She said the funding agreement allows the government to shift quickly to supporting the development of other versions of the mRNA vaccines when new viral strains emerge.Risk to Humans Remains LowThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) maintains that the avian flu risk to humans remains low. " No segment of the population has been recommended for vaccination," the ASPR spokesperson said.But in the CDC's most recent update, the agency said, "This is a rapidly changing situation" and posted interim recommendations for prevention, monitoring, and public health investigations of avian flu virus infections in people. Four human cases of cow-to-human transmission have been reported, with the latest case in Colorado. Human cases were first reported in farmworkers in Texas and Michigan. There have been 160 confirmed cases in livestock herds in 12 states.Cell-Based Vaccines vs mRNAThe two kinds of vaccine work in different ways. The cell-based version grows the influenza virus in a cell culture, and the virus is then inactivated, purified, and used as the vaccine antigen. Rather than using part of an actual virus, Moderna's vaccines use mRNA that codes for viral antigens. The body's own cellular machinery then creates those antigens, which induce the immune system to generate antibodies that will recognize them on the virus. Once cells finish making a protein, they quickly break down the mRNA.With the two vaccines soon to be available if needed, HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra said the country is well prepared for a possible pandemic. " We have successfully taken lessons learned during the COVID-19 pandemic and used them to better prepare for future public health crises. As part of that, we continue to develop new vaccines and other tools to help address influenza and bolster our pandemic response capabilities," he said in a statement. "Importantly, we are doing this work in partnership with some of the nation's leading scientists and clinicians." 0CreditLead image: E+ / Getty ImagesMedscape Medical News © 2024 WebMD, LLCSend comments and news tips to news@medscape.net. Cite this: US Invests in Avian Flu Vaccine Candidates - Medscape - July 19, 2024. TOP PICKS FOR YOU Recommendations What to Read Next on MedscapeSpecial Coverage: COVID-19LatestPerspectiveGuidelinesDrugs & DiseasesGlobal CoverageAdditional ResourcesBusiness of MedicinePCPs Prep for 'Less Predictable' Respiratory Virus SeasonHow the End of the COVID Public Health Emergency May Affect YouQ&A With Long COVID Patient, Researcher: Treatments Lagging as Cases Rise Recommended Reading Drugsinfluenza A (H5N1) vaccineDrugsinfluenza virus vaccine quadrivalentDrugsinfluenza virus vaccine trivalent, recombinantDrugsinfluenza virus vaccine trivalent, cell-culturedRelated Conditions & ProceduresInfluenzaPediatric InfluenzaInfluenza Antiviral TherapyHaemophilus Influenzae InfectionsDiagnostic Influenza TestsPediatric Haemophilus Influenzae InfectionSLIDESHOW10 Travel Diseases You Need to KnowExpert CommentaryH1N1 Influenza A (Swine Flu) Alert CenterCDC Makes Public Influenza A Wastewater Data to Assist Bird Flu ProbeGuidance for Practicing Primary Care: World Health Organization's Updated Influenza Guidelines for 2024 3090D553-9492-4563-8681-AD288FA52ACE .The Medical Minute: Why experts are watching the H5N1 bird flu so closely - Penn State Health News Skip to content Menu Home Events News By Topic Ask Us Anything About Community Education Medical Minute News Patient Care People Research News By Location Penn State Health Penn State Cancer Institute Penn State Health Children’s Hospital Penn State College of Medicine Penn State Medical Group Hampden Medical Center Holy Spirit Medical Center Lancaster Medical Center Milton S. Hershey Medical Center St. Joseph Medical Center Home Events News By Topic Ask Us Anything About Community Education Medical Minute News Patient Care People Research News By Location Penn State Health Penn State Cancer Institute Penn State Health Children’s Hospital Penn State College of Medicine Penn State Medical Group Hampden Medical Center Holy Spirit Medical Center Lancaster Medical Center Milton S. Hershey Medical Center St. Joseph Medical Center The Medical Minute: Why experts are watching the H5N1 bird flu so closely Several people started to develop concerning symptoms after working with dairy cows, adding to headlines that had already become worrisome.July 17, 2024Penn State Health News Bird flu, they said. For decades, medical scientists have warned of the potentially cataclysmic dangers of variants of so-called avian flu. From antiquity to as recently as 15 years ago, outbreaks of bird flu have wreaked havoc on a global scale. The pandemic of 1918, which killed more than 50 million people and sickened 500 million others worldwide, was caused by a virus that began with infected birds directly sickening humans. So, are three people with conjunctivitis the opening salvo of a new pandemic? The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says the threat so far is minimal. But there are worrying signs when it comes to H5N1. Dr. Catharine Paules, an infectious diseases physician at Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, discusses why bird flu isn’t something to be taken lightly, why experts are watching H5N1 so closely and what you can do to help stop its spread. What exactly is bird flu? Influenza A viruses, which cause the flu, have many different subtypes and can infect multiple species, including humans. A natural reservoir, though, is wild aquatic birds. Since 1900, influenza A viruses have caused four pandemics. Each of them was caused by an animal virus that changed (mutated) and started infecting people. That can happen directly from a bird ― like in the pandemic of 1918, which, prior to COVID, caused the most deaths of any infectious disease pandemic in history. Or it can happen with a mammalian intermediate host that transmits it to humans. The 2009 influenza pandemic, for example, was transmitted to humans by pigs. The remarkable capacity of influenza viruses to mutate and jump species leaves us vulnerable to future pandemics. Experts watch influenza viruses in other species, including birds, and assess the likelihood that they may cause a future pandemic. According to the CDC’s website, there have been very few human cases of H5N1 bird flu in the U.S. Why is it even being discussed right now? While H5N1 primarily infects birds, various strains have caused nearly 900 human infections, approximately half of which have been fatal. So far, these infections are largely isolated, meaning a person gets sick from contact with the bird or an infected mammal but is then unable to easily spread the infection to other people. To cause a pandemic, H5N1 would need to develop changes in the virus that would allow it to spread easily among people. In 2022, a new strain of H5N1 began to circulate among wild birds in the U.S. with lethal spillover infections in poultry flocks and adaptations allowing infections in mammals such as mink, foxes, ferrets and seals. In March, a substrain was reported among dairy cattle in the U.S. and appears to be spreading efficiently among herds. As of July 12, 151 herds in the U.S. have been infected. Widespread transmission of H5N1 in cows gives the virus opportunities to develop mutations that may make it easier to infect and then spread efficiently between humans. At this point several human infections have occurred in people exposed to infected dairy cattle. While no person-to-person transmission has occurred, we are watching this virus carefully and need to prepare for that possibility. How does it spread among cows? What about to humans? At this point, we don’t know how the virus is spreading between cows or from cows to people. Close contact with infected cows, contaminated objects or unpasteurized milk may be contributing to spread. Speaking of milk is there any risk to drinking it or eating other dairy products? The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has done extensive testing to ensure the safety of the milk supply. So far, no live virus (only dead parts of the virus) has been found in pasteurized dairy products. Unpasteurized milk from infected cows, however, does contain live virus and it is possible that you could get sick from drinking it. There is never a good time to drink unpasteurized dairy, but now it is especially dangerous. What are the symptoms of H5N1? Other strains of H5N1 that have infected people have caused fevers, respiratory symptoms including cough and shortness of breath, body aches and gastrointestinal symptoms or neurologic symptoms like seizures. We are still learning about human H5N1 infections after contact with cows but several people have had eye redness and one had respiratory symptoms. How do you determine someone has it? Health care providers work with public health officials to identify the virus. Respiratory samples are tested similarly to when someone is tested for seasonal flu. In some cases, an eye swab may also be checked. What, if anything, can you do to protect yourself and your family? For most people right now, the risk of getting H5N1 is low and to make that risk even lower you can avoid exposure to poultry and cows, especially those that appear ill. You should also avoid unpasteurized dairy products. It is important to be aware of the situation in case the risk increases and further preventative actions need to be taken. The risk is higher for farmers and others who have frequent contact with birds and cows. The CDC has developed guidance for personal protective equipment that can be worn. There also are medicines that can be prescribed if you have an exposure, before you get sick. Vaccines may eventually be available. What should I do if I think I’m sick? It is important to contact a health care provider as soon as symptoms start. It is best to call ahead before coming to a health care facility so that appropriate precautions can be taken to protect other patients and staff. Your health care provider will be able to arrange testing and can prescribe medications that may help your illness. Do you think H5N1 will cause a pandemic? I have a lot of respect for the ability of influenza to cause pandemics as we have seen this documented throughout history. I don’t know whether this particular strain of H5N1 will cause a pandemic, but in some respects, it’s only a matter of time until we are confronted with another influenza pandemic. The time to prepare is now — before it happens. Has the COVID-19 pandemic prepared us for this? COVID-19 has taught us the scale of impact that a respiratory virus pandemic can cause in terms of deaths, hospitalizations and economic losses. It’s also shown us that we are not as prepared as we should be for the next one. Preparing for a pandemic can only benefit us, and we still have a lot of work to do. Related content: The Medical Minute: Preparing for flu season The Medical Minute is a weekly health news feature produced by Penn State Health. Articles feature the expertise of faculty, physicians and staff, and are designed to offer timely, relevant health information of interest to a broad audience. If you're having trouble accessing this content, or would like it in another format, please email Penn State Health Marketing & Communications. Share this story Subscribe to our email newsletter Please leave this field empty Check your inbox or spam folder now to confirm your subscription. Related Stories Penn State Health Holy Spirit Medical Center unveils new nursing simulation lab The Medical Minute: Back to school health tips for parents The Medical Minute: Getting to the heart of heartburn ─ what to know, how to treat it Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute to relocate to Penn State Health Holy Spirit Medical Center in fall 2026 The Medical Minute: Return to play after injury -- What athletes and families should know The Medical Minute: The dangers of cerebral aneurysms By Topic Ask Us Anything About Community Education Medical Minute News Patient Care People Research By Location Penn State Health Penn State Cancer Institute Penn State College of Medicine Penn State Health Children’s Hospital Penn State Medical Group Hampden Medical Center Holy Spirit Medical Center Lancaster Medical Center Milton S. Hershey Medical Center St. Joseph Medical Center Other Media Guidelines Media Resources Patient Conditions Statements © 2024 Penn State College of Medicine Non-Discrimination Privacy Have questions, or suggestions for missing content? Email us at comweb@pennstatehealth.psu.eduFrontiers | Analysis of factors influencing influenza outbreaks in schools in Taicang City, China Skip to main content Top bar navigation Frontiers in Public Health About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Search Frontiers in Public Health Sections Sections Aging and Public HealthChildren and HealthDigital Public HealthDisaster and Emergency MedicineEnvironmental Health and ExposomeHealth EconomicsInfectious Diseases: Epidemiology and PreventionInjury Prevention and ControlLife-Course Epidemiology and Social Inequalities in HealthOccupational Health and SafetyPlanetary HealthPublic Health Education and PromotionPublic Health PolicyPublic Health and NutritionPublic Mental HealthRadiation and HealthSubstance Use Disorders and Behavioral Addictions ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office About us About us Who we are MissionValuesHistoryLeadershipAwardsImpact and progress Frontiers' impactProgress Report 2022All progress reportsPublishing model How we publishOpen accessFee policyPeer reviewResearch integrityResearch TopicsServices SocietiesNational consortiaInstitutional partnershipsCollaboratorsMore from Frontiers Frontiers ForumFrontiers Planet PrizePress officeCarbon footprintCareer opportunitiesContact us All journalsAll articles Submit your research Frontiers in Public Health Sections Sections Aging and Public HealthChildren and HealthDigital Public HealthDisaster and Emergency MedicineEnvironmental Health and ExposomeHealth EconomicsInfectious Diseases: Epidemiology and PreventionInjury Prevention and ControlLife-Course Epidemiology and Social Inequalities in HealthOccupational Health and SafetyPlanetary HealthPublic Health Education and PromotionPublic Health PolicyPublic Health and NutritionPublic Mental HealthRadiation and HealthSubstance Use Disorders and Behavioral Addictions ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Frontiers in Public Health Sections Sections Aging and Public HealthChildren and HealthDigital Public HealthDisaster and Emergency MedicineEnvironmental Health and ExposomeHealth EconomicsInfectious Diseases: Epidemiology and PreventionInjury Prevention and ControlLife-Course Epidemiology and Social Inequalities in HealthOccupational Health and SafetyPlanetary HealthPublic Health Education and PromotionPublic Health PolicyPublic Health and NutritionPublic Mental HealthRadiation and HealthSubstance Use Disorders and Behavioral Addictions ArticlesResearch TopicsEditorial board About journal About journal Scope Field chief editorsMission & scopeFactsJournal sectionsOpen access statementCopyright statementQualityFor authors Why submit?Article typesAuthor guidelinesEditor guidelinesPublishing feesSubmission checklistContact editorial office Submit your research Search Download article Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) Share on Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex 603 Total views 270 Downloads Citation numbers are available from Dimensions View article impact View altmetric score Share on Edited by George Karani Cardiff Metropolitan University, United Kingdom Reviewed by Charles J Vukotich Jr. University of Pittsburgh, United States Ronald Balczon University of South Alabama, United States Table of contents Abstract 1 Introduction 2 Objects and methods 3 Results 4 Discussion 5 Limitations of this survey Data availability statement Ethics statement Author contributions Funding Conflict of interest Publisher’s note Supplementary material References Export citation EndNote Reference Manager Simple Text file BibTex Check for updates Download article Download Download PDF ReadCube EPUB XML (NLM) ORIGINAL RESEARCH article Front. Public Health, 19 July 2024 Sec. Infectious Diseases: Epidemiology and Prevention Volume 12 - 2024 | https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2024.1409004 This article is part of the Research Topic Novel Interventions for the Prevention and Control of Communicable Disease View all 10 articles Analysis of factors influencing influenza outbreaks in schools in Taicang City, China Yao Shi1,2†Lei Xu1†Hai Jiang1Yongbin Cai1Changjun Bao3*Wendong Liu3* 1Taicang City Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China 2Jiangsu Field Epidemiology Training Program, Jiangsu Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China 3Jiangsu Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Jiangsu Institution of Public Health, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China Objective: This study aims to analyze the awareness of influenza prevention and control and the behavioral attitudes toward the work among parents and staff in schools in Taicang City and the impact of the vaccination rate among students on influenza outbreaks in schools. The findings can provide references for the development of effective control strategies for the spread of influenza. Methods: An anonymous questionnaire survey was conducted on 10,962 students from 20 schools in Taicang City, with class as the unit of analysis. The survey investigated their awareness of influenza prevention and control, their attitudes, and the vaccination coverage. Results: From January to June 2023, a total of 388 influenza outbreaks were reported in schools in Taicang City, involving 77 schools. There were 3,475 confirmed cases, with an average infection rate of 18.53%. In schools where influenza outbreaks had occurred, the incidence rate of those who received influenza vaccine was significantly lower than those who did not, and the vaccine protection rate was 28.22%. The knowledge awareness rates of “the main transmission routes of influenza” and “influenza vaccination can prevent influenza” among parents of students were 95.49 and 93.16%, respectively. The differences between schools involved in the epidemic and non-epidemic were statistically significant (p < 0.05). The correct attitudes of parents toward “actively reporting relevant symptoms to teachers when their children show symptoms” and “avoiding classes with diseases when their children are suspected to be sick” are 98.80 and 96.26%, respectively. The differences between schools with and without epidemic are statistically significant (p < 0.05). The correct attitudes of the class teacher toward “correct management and control of students with flu like symptoms in the class” and “taking correct prevention and control measures in the event of a flu epidemic in the class” were 89.36 and 92.55%, respectively. The differences between epidemic related and non-epidemic related classes were statistically significant (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Enhance the knowledge level of influenza prevention and control among parents of students, Strengthening the training for class teachers in emergency response to infectious diseases and increasing vaccination coverage among students can effectively reduce the incidence of influenza and thereby the occurrence of cluster outbreaks in schools. 1 Introduction Influenza is an acute respiratory infectious disease caused by influenza viruses. It is mainly transmitted through droplets (1) and direct contact between individuals (2–4). It poses a serious threat to public health as it is highly contagious and can spread fast. Influenza outbreaks tend to occur in densely populated areas such as schools (5) and childcare facilities (6). In China, over 90% of reported influenza outbreaks occur in schools and childcare facilities (7). According to data from the Australian National Statutory Disease Surveillance System, the highest proportion of reported cases of influenza B were among children between 2001 and 2014 (8). Scholars in the United States have also shown that the gathering and activity environment on campus may lead to the rapid spread of influenza after its introduction, resulting in outbreaks (9). Taicang City is located in the southeast of Jiangsu Province, on the south bank of the Yangtze River Estuary, with a total area of 809.93 square kilometers. The permanent population is 843,600, and the urbanization rate is 71.03%. Taicang City has 126 schools of all levels and types, including 64 kindergartens, 39 primary schools, 16 ordinary junior high schools, four ordinary high schools, one special education school, one secondary vocational school, and one higher vocational and technical college. There are 118,400 students in the city. From January to June 2023, Taicang City in China’s Jiangsu Province witnessed a total of 431 outbreaks of infectious diseases in schools, of which 388 were influenza outbreaks, accounting for 90% of the total. Influenza outbreaks occurring in schools have become a major burden and challenge for infectious disease prevention and control in Taicang. Research on the factors influencing influenza outbreaks occurring in schools is lacking. This survey comprehensively analyzes the occurrence of influenza outbreaks in different levels and types of schools in Taicang City from January to June 2023. It investigates the impact of prevention and control measures taken in schools on the occurrence and development of influenza outbreaks and analyzes factors influencing influenza outbreaks in schools in Taicang City and vaccine protection rates to provide a basis for scientific prevention and targeted interventions. 2 Objects and methods 2.1 Research objects Stratified sampling was used to select 10 schools (including five primary schools and five kindergartens) in Taicang City that experienced influenza outbreaks from January to June 2023 as the research objects, and a proportional sample of schools (five primary schools and five kindergartens) that did not experience influenza outbreaks during the same period was selected as the control group. The number of students, class teachers and school doctors participating in the study was 10,962, 188, and 28, respectively. They accounted for 13.84, 11.92, and 25.23% of the corresponding total population, respectively. 2.1.1 Selection of school doctors For schools with 1–2 school doctors, all school doctors are required to fill in a questionnaire. In schools with more than two school doctors, two were randomly selected to fill in the questionnaire. 2.1.2 Selection of class teachers In the survey schools, all classes with outbreaks were investigated. One class with no epidemic was randomly selected from each grade as a control. In the control schools, one class was randomly selected for each grade. The head teachers of the above classes are required to fill in the questionnaire. 2.1.3 Selection of parents One parent from each student in the selected class will be included in the survey and fill out the questionnaire. 2.2 Case definition Influenza like cases are defined as those with fever (body temperature ≥ 38°C) and either cough or sore throat. The fever mentioned here should be in the course of an acute febrile illness, and body temperatures measured by both medical institutions and patients can be used for temperature determination. 2.3 Criteria for epidemic reporting (1) Three or more new influenza like cases are found in a class in a day; (2) five or more new influenza like cases are found in a class in 3 days.《Monitoring Plan for Clustered Epidemic of Common Infectious Diseases in Schools in Taicang City》. 2.4 Investigation contents and methods 1. The data on influenza cluster outbreaks in schools comes from active monitoring of influenza cluster outbreaks in the jurisdiction, registration of epidemic reports, on-site epidemiological investigations, and disposal records. 2. The basic information of the school, the implementation of influenza epidemic prevention and control measures, and the mastery of influenza prevention and control knowledge by school doctors, class teachers, and parents were all obtained through questionnaire surveys. 2.5 Vaccination history It refers to whether influenza vaccines have been administered since September 2022 (before the occurrence of the current illness). 2.6 Statistical analysis Descriptive epidemiological analysis of influenza outbreaks and influenza vaccination coverage was conducted using SPSS 27.0. Comparison of rates and risk estimation were performed using the chi-square test (χ2-test). A p-value less than 0.05 indicates statistical significance. 3 Results 3.1 Overall situation of influenza outbreaks From January to June 2023, a total of 388 influenza outbreaks occurring in schools were reported in Taicang City, including 96 in kindergartens (24.74%), 240 in primary schools (61.86%), 11 in secondary schools (2.84%), and 41 in technical secondary schools (10.57%). The influenza outbreaks were mainly concentrated in primary schools and kindergartens. The outbreaks affected 77 schools and 437 classes, with an average infection rate of 18.53% in classes. Specifically, the rate was the highest in kindergartens, hitting 19.73% (Table 1). Table 1 Table 1. Average infection rates in influenza outbreaks occurring in different levels of schools. Each influenza cluster involved 3–29 cases, with 264 (68.04%) involving fewer than 10 cases, 110 (28.35%) involving 10–20 cases, and 14 (3.61%) involving more than 20 cases. Eight outbreaks affected three or more classes, 25 affected two classes, and the remaining 355 affected only one class. In the spring semester (from February to June), there was a peak in the number of influenza outbreaks in schools. A total of 284 cluster outbreaks occurred in March, accounting for 73.20% of the total number in the first half of the year. No influenza outbreaks were reported in January (Figure 1). Figure 1 Figure 1. Time distribution of influenza outbreaks in different levels and types of schools in Taicang City from January to June 2023. 3.2 The impact of vaccinations on influenza outbreaks Ten schools with a relatively large number of influenza cluster occurrences (≥5) were selected as the research objects from the 77 schools that experienced influenza outbreaks in Taicang City from January to June 2023. Ten schools were randomly selected as the control group from schools where no influenza outbreaks occurred during the same period. The average vaccination rate in schools with influenza outbreaks was 15.14%, while that in schools without influenza outbreaks was 19.61%. The former was significantly lower than the latter (χ2 = 38.001, p < 0.05) (Table 2). Table 2 Table 2. Comparison of vaccination rates between schools where influenza outbreaks had or had not occurred. At the class-level, the average vaccination rate in classes with influenza outbreaks was 13.16%, while that in classes without influenza outbreaks was 19.76%. The former was significantly lower than the latter (χ2 = 76.670, p < 0.05) (Table 3). Table 3 Table 3. Comparison of vaccination rates between classes where influenza outbreaks had or had not occurred. Based on the analysis of classes from all selected relevant schools, the average vaccination rate was 20.33% in the surveyed schools without cluster outbreaks, while in the control schools without cluster outbreaks, the average vaccination rate was 19.61%. The difference is not statistically significant (χ2 = 0.391, p > 0.05) (Table 4). Table 4 Table 4. Comparison of vaccination rates between classes in schools without cluster outbreaks and control schools without cluster outbreaks. In the selected schools with influenza outbreaks, the average vaccination rate among influenza cases was 11.36%, while that among non-cases was 16.58%. The former was significantly lower than the latter (χ2 = 23.048, p < 0.05) (Table 5). Table 5 Table 5. Vaccination rates among cases and non-cases. 3.3 Parents’ knowledge about influenza prevention and control and their behavioral attitude 3.3.1 Parents’ knowledge of influenza prevention and control Among the 10,962 parents surveyed, a total of 39,546 correct answers were provided for the four influenza-related knowledge questions, with an overall awareness rate of 90.19%. Among them, the awareness rate of “the main transmission routes of influenza” is the highest, reaching 95.49%, and the difference between the epidemic school group and the non-epidemic school group is statistically significant (χ2 = 29.734, p < 0.05). The awareness rate of “vaccination against influenza can prevent influenza” is 93.16%, and the difference between the epidemic school group and the non-epidemic school group is also statistically significant (χ2 = 15.989, p < 0.05). After dividing the surveyed subjects into epidemic related school group and non-epidemic related school group, it was found that a total of 5,454 parents of students in the epidemic related school group were surveyed, and 19,566 correct answers were given to 4 influenza related knowledge items, with a total awareness rate of 89.69%; A total of 5,508 parents of students in the non-epidemic school group were surveyed, and 19,980 correct answers were given to 4 influenza related knowledge items, with a knowledge rate of 90.69%; However, there was no statistically significant difference (χ2 = 1.108, p > 0.05) in the comparison of the awareness rates of “influenza epidemic season” and “which infectious disease influenza belongs to” between the epidemic school group and the non-epidemic school group in terms of related knowledge (Table 6). Table 6 Table 6. Comparison of the awareness rates of knowledge among parents. 3.3.2 Parents’ correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control Among the parents surveyed, totally 42,180 parents had a correct attitude toward influenza prevention and control, accounting for 96.20% of the total. Among them, the proportion of correct attitudes toward “children reporting relevant symptoms to teachers proactively” was the highest, reaching 98.80%, with a statistically significant difference (χ2 = 4.007, p < 0.05). The proportion of correct attitudes toward “children suspected to be ill and avoiding attending classes with illness” is 96.26%, with a statistically significant difference (χ2 = 19.631, p < 0.05). There was no statistically significant difference (p > 0.05) in the proportion of correct attitudes between the epidemic related school group and the non-epidemic related school group in terms of “avoiding contact with others during children’s quarantine period” and “avoiding taking children to crowded and polluted places during influenza epidemic period” (Table 7). Table 7 Table 7. Comparison of parents’ correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control. 3.4 Teachers’ knowledge of influenza prevention and control and their behavioral attitude 3.4.1 Class teachers’ knowledge of influenza prevention and control Among the class teachers surveyed, a total of 560 correct answers were provided for the four influenza-related questions, with an overall awareness rate of 74.47%. The awareness rate of influenza prevention methods is the highest (88.83%). The teachers from schools with influenza outbreaks gave 275 correct answers, with an overall awareness rate of 73.92%. Those from schools without influenza outbreaks gave 285 correct answers, with an awareness rate of 75.00%. The differences between the awareness rates of the two groups were not statistically significant (χ2 = 0.028, p > 0.05) (Table 8). Table 8 Table 8. Comparison of the awareness rates of knowledge among class teachers. 3.4.2 Class teachers’ correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control Among the class teachers surveyed, 702 instances held correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control, accounting for 93.35% of the total. The proportion of correct control measures for students with flu like symptoms in the class is 89.36%, and the difference between epidemic related and non-epidemic related classes is statistically significant (χ2 = 8.346, p < 0.05). The proportion of “taking correct prevention and control measures when a flu epidemic occurs in the class” is 92.55%, and the difference is also statistically significant (χ2 = 5.125, p < 0.05). In terms of other attitudes, the proportion of asymptomatic infected individuals who need to adopt home isolation is the highest, accounting for 97.34%. The proportion of strict requirements for sick students to implement home isolation was 94.15%, however, there was no statistically significant difference in the holding of correct attitudes mentioned above (χ2 = 2.418, p > 0.05) (Table 9). Table 9 Table 9. Class teachers’ correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control. 3.5 School doctors’ knowledge of influenza prevention and control and their behavioral attitude 3.5.1 School doctors’ knowledge of influenza prevention and control Among the school teachers surveyed, a total of 81 correct answers were provided for the four influenza-related knowledge questions, with an overall awareness rate of 72.32% The question regarding the incubation period of influenza saw the highest awareness rate (92.86%). School teachers from schools where influenza outbreaks had occurred gave 36 correct answers, with an overall awareness rate of 64.29%. Those from schools where influenza outbreaks had not occurred gave 45 correct answers, with an awareness rate of 80.36%. The differences between the awareness rates of the two groups were not statistically significant (χ2 = 1.909, p > 0.05) (Table 10). Table 10 Table 10. School doctors’ knowledge of influenza prevention and control. 3.5.2 School doctors’ correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control A total of 95 instances were recorded where the school doctors surveyed held correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control, accounting for 84.82% of the total. Specifically, the rate of correctly managing and controlling students who had presented influenza-like symptoms was the highest, reaching 100% in both groups of schools. The proportion of school doctors advocating for home quarantine for asymptomatic carriers was the lowest, standing at 64.29%. The proportion of those who timely reported the situation when the criteria for school closure were met reached 82.14%, and those who performed influenza virus sampling at the best time accounted for 91.30%. The differences between the aforementioned corrected attitudes were not statistically significant (χ2 = 0.974, p > 0.05) (Table 11). Table 11 Table 11. School doctors’ correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control. 3.6 Implementation of influenza prevention and control measures in schools A comparison was made regarding the implementation of 11 specific measures for infectious disease prevention and control. The results showed no significant difference in the implementation of prevention and control measures between the two groups of schools (Table 12). Table 12 Table 12. Main risk factors in schools with influenza outbreaks. 3.7 Reasons for students’ reluctance to receive the influenza vaccine Among the 10,962 surveyed individuals, 1,906 (17.4%) had been vaccinated against influenza. Among the 9,056 individuals who had not received the vaccine, the reasons for their reluctance to be vaccinated, ranked from high to low, were as follows: “concern about vaccine safety” (4,226 individuals, 46.67%); “missed the centralized vaccination period” (2,136 individuals, 23.59%); “no unified organization by the school” (1,028 individuals, 11.35%); “child has contraindications for vaccination” (630 individuals, 6.96%); “physical discomfort during the scheduled vaccination period, not meeting the vaccination criteria” (322 individuals, 3.56%); “belief that the vaccine is not effective” (238 individuals, 2.63%); “already scheduled for vaccination, but the time has not arrived” (124 individuals, 1.37%); “unclear about how to schedule a vaccination” (118 individuals, 1.30%); “good physical condition, no need for vaccination” (90 individuals, 0.99%); “no time to take the child for vaccination” (64 individuals, 0.71%); “child is afraid of injections and unwilling to be vaccinated” (38 individuals, 0.42%); and “recently received another vaccine, and the doctor advised to wait for 6 months before receiving the influenza vaccine” (22 individuals, 0.24%); “flu vaccine need to pay for themselves” (20 individuals, 0.22%) (Table 13). Table 13 Table 13. Reasons for students’ reluctance to receive the influenza vaccine. 4 Discussion According to our study, influenza outbreaks in schools in Taicang City were concentrated in kindergartens and primary schools, accounting for 86.6% of the total number. In particular, cases in these two types of schools accounted for 90.3% of the total cases. This is consistent with reports from other regions (10–12), indicating that students in these schools may be more susceptible to influenza transmission (13), possibly due to their relatively weaker immune systems or more frequent contact with each other. In addition, the data showed that most outbreaks in schools were relatively small in scale, with 91.5% of the influenza outbreaks affecting only one class. This may be related to the decision to suspend classes when the local epidemic was found (14, 15). In terms of time distribution, there was a peak in March, with a total of 284 influenza outbreaks occurring, accounting for 73.20% of the total in the first half in 2023. This may be related to the seasonal nature of influenza transmission. This study also shows that schools with influenza outbreaks had lower influenza vaccination rates in the study period, particularly in schools with more severe outbreaks where the average vaccination rate was only 15.14%. In comparison, schools without influenza outbreaks had a much higher average vaccination rate of 19.61%, suggesting that the vaccination may play a good role in preventing the spread of influenza in schools (16–18). Furthermore, in all schools with influenza outbreaks, the average influenza vaccination rate among cases was 11.36%, significantly lower than that among non-cases (16.58%). The statistically significant difference suggests the importance of influenza vaccination in reducing the occurrence and containing the spread of influenza. Vaccination, currently is the most economical and effective means of preventing influenza and its complications (19). Increasing influenza vaccination coverage in schools (20), especially in primary schools and kindergartens (21) is an important measure to effectively reduce the occurrence of influenza outbreaks in schools (22–24). An analysis of the knowledge of influenza prevention and control showed that parents, class teachers, and school doctors demonstrated good overall awareness rates, with rates of 90.19, 74.47, and 72.32%, respectively. The awareness rates of “the main transmission routes of influenza” and “influenza vaccination can prevent influenza” among parents of students were 95.49 and 93.16%, respectively. There was a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05) between schools involved in the epidemic and non-epidemic, while no significant difference was found in the awareness rates of the four influenza related knowledge between the homeroom teacher and the school doctor. This indicates that the level of influenza knowledge among parents of students is an important factor leading to the occurrence of the epidemic. Therefore, in the future, it is necessary to pay more attention to improving the awareness level of influenza knowledge among parents of students, carrying out influenza knowledge promotion activities, and improving the overall level of disease prevention and control knowledge among the public. This will help to improve the overall effectiveness of influenza prevention and control in schools (25). An analysis of correct attitudes toward influenza prevention and control showed that 96.20% of parents, 93.35% of class teachers, and 84.82% of school doctors held correct attitudes. In terms of school medicine, there is no significant difference between schools involved in the epidemic and non-epidemic schools. However, there is a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05) in the correct attitudes of parents toward “actively reporting relevant symptoms to the teacher when the child appears” and “avoiding classes with suspected illness when the child appears” between schools affected by the epidemic and non-epidemic. Similarly, there is a statistically significant difference (p < 0.05) in the correct attitude of the class teacher toward “correct control of students with flu like symptoms in the class” and “taking correct prevention and control measures in the class when a flu epidemic occurs” between epidemic and non-epidemic classes. This indicates that whether parents and homeroom teachers hold the correct attitude toward influenza prevention and control is an important factor leading to the outbreak of the epidemic. This indicates that in terms of epidemic prevention and control, it is necessary to strengthen the awareness of parents of students to actively report their children’s discomfort symptoms to teachers, avoid attending classes with illnesses, and reduce the spread and spread within the class. At the same time, further strengthen the emergency response training for class teachers, improve their ability to respond to the epidemic, and thus reduce the occurrence of class gatherings of epidemics (26). Studies have revealed that during influenza outbreaks, it is crucial to intensify education on personal hygiene for students, teachers, and parents, encourage them to develop good hygiene habits (27), and enhance the awareness of self-protection and prevention (28). Therefore, it is important to strengthen training in epidemic prevention and control and correct misconceptions, which contributes greatly to the effective management of infectious diseases in schools. A comprehensive analysis of awareness and behavioral attitudes of parents, teachers, and school doctors on influenza prevention and control is conducted. There are two main reasons why influenza knowledge assessment scores of teachers and school doctors are lower than those of parents. Firstly, the focus of influenza prevention and control knowledge varies among parents, teachers, and school doctors. The difficulty of influenza knowledge tests on school doctors and teachers is relatively higher than that on parents, which may lead to parents having a better understanding of the illusion of influenza than teachers or doctors. Secondly, the survey results show that some school doctors do not have a medical background, and some are part-time school doctors. We have provided feedback on this issue to educational institutions and proposed improvement suggestions. Besides, we have jointly organized multiple lectures and training sessions on campus epidemic prevention and control knowledge with educational institutions, aiming to improve the professional level of school doctors. Uncovering problems is precisely the significance of our investigation. By identifying the problems, we can propose more measures of improvement. An analysis of the implementation of influenza prevention and control measures in schools showed that although the results indicated no significant differences between the two groups of schools, this might be influenced by the small sample size or subjective response tendency of the respondents. However, other studies have shown that targeted risk management can effectively improve the implementation rate of prevention and control measures for infectious disease outbreaks in schools, lower the risk level, and thereby reduce the occurrence of disease outbreaks (29). The implementation of risk management for prevention and control of disease outbreaks in schools requires the schools to play a major role and take on the responsibility of improving organizational structures and hygiene facilities and implementing daily prevention and control measures (30). Strict implementation of morning and afternoon checkups, strict prevention of students attending classes or school when ill, effective management of potential sources of infection (31), and ventilation, disinfection, and health education measures are all key aspects of prevention and control (32). It is worth noting that schools must stay highly vigilant at any signs of disease outbreaks and measures such as early detection, reporting, isolation, and treatment should be strictly implemented, following the “early, careful, strict, and practical” prevention and control strategy (33). Early implementation of control measures (34) is crucial for reducing the incidence of influenza outbreaks and the infection rate in schools and is a key step in continuously reducing the risk of disease outbreaks (35, 36). The analysis results of students’ willingness to receive the influenza vaccine indicate that the main reasons for their reluctance to be vaccinated include concerns about vaccine safety (46.67%), missed centralized vaccination periods (23.59%), the school not organizing unified vaccinations (11.35%), and children having contraindications for vaccination (6.96%). These factors reflect issues such as insufficient trust in the vaccine, inappropriate organization, and inappropriate scheduling during the vaccination process. To improve the influenza vaccination rate in schools, the following measures are recommended: Firstly, strengthen education and awareness on vaccine safety to address parents’ concerns and apprehensions. Secondly, arrange vaccination times reasonably to ensure that more students can receive the vaccine in a timely manner. Thirdly, recommend organizing unified vaccinations through schools to simplify the vaccination process and enhance convenience. Fourthly, personalized prevention and control advice should be provided for children with contraindications to ensure that they can also receive effective protection. Addressing these issues is crucial for comprehensively improving the effectiveness of influenza prevention and control. This will not only help increase the influenza vaccination rate in schools but also effectively reduce the spread of influenza and protect the health of students. The analysis of various influencing factors reveals that the prevention and control of influenza outbreaks in schools is a complex and systematic undertaking. It requires not only the effective implementation by schools but also the collaboration of different stakeholders, such as the government, disease prevention and control agencies, and public health departments (37). Increasing vaccination coverage (38, 39), spreading influenza-related knowledge, and enhancing the emergency response capabilities (40) of class teachers are all effective intervention measures (41). In addition, scientific and precise risk management and timely adjustments to prevention and control measures are crucial for preventing and mitigating the impact of influenza outbreaks in schools. Furthermore, it is important to pay more attention to health education for teachers and parents of students and intensify the training of school doctors and health care teachers, so as to increase influenza vaccination rates in more schools (42, 43). Prevention and control strategies can be further optimized and innovated, and more specific and effective measures can be developed based on the actual situation of different schools to enhance the anti-epidemic level. In conclusion, this study analyzed multiple aspects of influenza outbreaks occurring in schools in Taicang City, providing theoretical and practical references for future epidemic prevention and control. However, prevention and control work is an evolving process, and future research on disease outbreaks in schools will need to involve large samples to investigate the potential factors influencing influenza outbreaks in schools. It is also important to timely optimize strategies to be well-prepared for epidemic prevention and control efforts (44–46). 5 Limitations of this survey 1. Due to limitations in manpower and resources, the questionnaire items may not be precise enough. Some unclear or ambiguous questions might have affected the answers. 2. As the sample came from specific regions, schools, or grades, it cannot represent the nationwide level of influenza-related knowledge and awareness, leading to geographical bias. 3. The timing of the survey may have been influenced by seasonal influenza, as people’s attention to influenza and knowledge of it may vary across different seasons, affecting the generalizability of the results. 4. The answers from the respondents may be influenced by memory bias or subjective evaluation, leading to biased answers and potentially causing an overly optimistic or pessimistic estimation of influenza-related knowledge and awareness. 5. Since the survey relied mainly on questionnaires, it might not be possible to explore the respondents’ deeper understanding of influenza-related knowledge and comprehensively assess their understanding of and support for prevention and control measures. Data availability statement The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors. Ethics statement This effort of disease control was part of CDC’s routine responsibility in Taicang City, China. Therefore, institutional review and informed consent were not required for this study. All data analyzed were anonymized. Author contributions YS: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Methodology. LX: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Visualization, Data curation, Formal analysis. HJ: Writing – review & editing. YC: Writing – review & editing. CB: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Methodology. WL: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis, Methodology. Funding The author(s) declare financial support was received for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. This study was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2023YFC2605103). Conflict of interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Publisher’s note All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Supplementary material The Supplementary material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2024.1409004/full#supplementary-material References 1. Coleman, KK, and Sigler, WV. Airborne influenza a virus exposure in an elementary school. Sci Rep. (2020) 10:1859. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-58588-1 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 2. Brankston, G, Gitterman, L, Hirji, Z, Lemieux, C, and Gardam, M. Transmission of influenza a in human beings. Lancet Infect Dis. (2007) 7:257–65. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(07)70029-4 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 3. Killingley, B, and Nguyen-Van-Tam, J. Routes of influenza transmission. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. (2013) 7:42–51. doi: 10.1111/irv.12080 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 4. Kutter, JS, Spronken, MI, Fraaij, PL, Fouchier, RA, and Herfst, S. Transmission routes of respiratory viruses among humans. Curr Opin Virol. (2018) 28:142–51. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2018.01.001 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 5. Kyncl, J, and Havlícková, M. Basic epidemiological characteristics of influenza infection. Klinicka Mikrobiol Inf Lekarstvi. (2010) 16:116–9. doi: 10.1271/irv.12152 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 6. Meng, X, Zhao, H, Ou, R, Zeng, Q, Lv, H, Zhu, H, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of influenza outbreaks among children in Chongqing, China. Front Publ Health. (2022) 10:760746. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.760746 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 7. Ryu, S, and Cowling, BJ. Human influenza epidemiology. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. (2021) 11:a038356. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a038356 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 8. Moa, AM, Muscatello, DJ, Turner, RM, and MacIntyre, CR. Epidemiology of influenza B in Australia: 2001-2014 influenza seasons. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. (2017) 11:102–9. doi: 10.1111/irv.12432 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 9. Lewis, NM, Delahoy, MJ, Sumner, KM, Lauring, AS, Bendall, EE, Mortenson, L, et al. Risk factors for infection with influenza a(H3N2) virus on a US university campus, October-November 2021. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. (2023) 17:e13151. doi: 10.1111/irv.13151 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 10. Yan, L, Gao, Y, Zhang, Y, Tildesley, M, Liu, L, Zhang, Y, et al. Epidemiological and virological characteristics of pandemic influenza a (H1N1) school outbreaks in China in 2009. PLoS One. (2012) 7:e45898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045898 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 11. Huai, Y, Lin, J, Varma, JK, Peng, Z, He, J, Cheng, C, et al. A primary school outbreak of pandemic 2009 influenza a (H1N1) in China. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. (2010) 4:259–66. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-2659.2010.00150.x PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 12. Wang, L, Chu, C, Yang, G, Hao, R, Li, Z, Cao, Z, et al. Transmission characteristics of different students during a school outbreak of (H1N1) pdm09 influenza in China, 2009. Sci Rep. (2014) 4:5982. doi: 10.1038/srep05982 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 13. Liu, LJ, Yang, J, Zhu, F, Wang, LJ, Guo, Q, Tang, J, et al. Influenza-like illness outbreaks in China during 2017-2018 surveillance season. Chin J Prev Med. (2019) 53:982–6. doi: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-9624.2019.10.006 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 14. Kawano, S, and Kakehashi, M. Substantial impact of school closure on the transmission dynamics during the pandemic flu H1N1-2009 in Oita, Japan. PLoS One. (2015) 10:e0144839. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144839 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 15. Jackson, C, Mangtani, P, Hawker, J, Olowokure, B, and Vynnycky, E. The effects of school closures on influenza outbreaks and pandemics: systematic review of simulation studies. PLoS One. (2014) 9:e97297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097297 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 16. Zhang, L, van der Hoek, W, Krafft, T, Pilot, E, Asten, LV, Lin, G, et al. Influenza vaccine effectiveness estimates against influenza a(H3N2) and a(H1N1) pdm09 among children during school-based outbreaks in the 2016-2017 season in Beijing. China Hum Vaccines Immunother. (2020) 16:816–22. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2019.1677438 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 17. Chen, DQ, Jiang, YW, Huang, F, Wu, XL, Ye, ZJ, Wu, Y, et al. Effectiveness of influenza vaccination for school-age children in preventing school absenteeism in Shenzhen: an empirical study. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. (2021) 42:1900–6. doi: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112338-20210723-00580 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 18. Kandel, R, and Hartshorn, KL. Novel strategies for prevention and treatment of influenza. Expert Opin Ther Targets. (2005) 9:1–22. doi: 10.1517/14728222.9.1.1 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 19. Tisa, V, Barberis, I, Faccio, V, Paganino, C, Trucchi, C, Martini, M, et al. Quadrivalent influenza vaccine: a new opportunity to reduce the influenza burden. J Prev Med Hyg. (2016) 57:E28–33. doi: 10.4162/21654515.2016.1555446 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 20. Zhou, N, Dai, H, Zha, W, and Lv, Y. The development trend of influenza in China from 2010 to 2019. Hum Vaccin Immunother. (2022) 18:2071558. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2022.2071558 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 21. Kawai, S, Nanri, S, Ban, E, Inokuchi, M, Tanaka, T, Tokumura, M, et al. Influenza vaccination of schoolchildren and influenza outbreaks in a school. Clin Infect Dis. (2011) 53:130–6. doi: 10.1093/cid/cir336 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 22. Ali, ST, Cowling, BJ, Lau, EHY, Fang, VJ, and Leung, GM. Mitigation of influenza B epidemic with school closures, Hong Kong, 2018. Emerg Infect Dis. (2018) 24:2071–3. doi: 10.3201/eid2411.180612 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 23. Bosaeed, M, and Kumar, D. Seasonal influenza vaccine in immunocompromised persons. Hum Vaccin Immunother. (2018) 14:1311–22. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2018.1445446 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 24. Rolfes, MA, Goswami, D, Sharmeen, AT, Yeasmin, S, Parvin, N, Nahar, K, et al. Efficacy of trivalent influenza vaccine against laboratory-confirmed influenza among young children in a randomized trial in Bangladesh. Vaccine. (2017) 35:6967–76. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.10.074 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 25. Carrillo-Santisteve, P, Ciancio, BC, Nicoll, A, and Lopalco, PL. The importance of influenza prevention for public health. Hum Vaccin Immunother. (2012) 8:89–95. doi: 10.4161/hv.8.1.19066 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 26. Endo, A, Uchida, M, Liu, Y, Atkins, KE, Kucharski, AJ, and Funk, S. Simulating respiratory disease transmission within and between classrooms to assess pandemic management strategies at schools. Proc Nat Acad Sci U S A. (2022) 119:e2203019119. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2203019119 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 27. Or, PP, Ching, PT, and Chung, JW. Can flu-like absenteeism in kindergartens be reduced through hand hygiene training for both parents and their kindergarteners? J Prim Care Commun Health. (2020) 11:2150132719901209. doi: 10.1177/2150132719901209 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 28. Endo, A, Uchida, M, Hayashi, N, Liu, Y, Atkins, KE, Kucharski, AJ, et al. Within and between classroom transmission patterns of seasonal influenza among primary school students in Matsumoto city, Japan. Proc Nat Acad Sci U S A. (2021) 118:e2112605118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2112605118 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 29. Chen, T, Huang, Y, Liu, R, Xie, Z, Chen, S, and Hu, G. Evaluating the effects of common control measures for influenza a (H1N1) outbreak at school in China: a modeling study. PLoS One. (2017) 12:e0177672. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177672 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 30. Bin Nafisah, S, Alamery, AH, Al Nafesa, A, Aleid, B, and Brazanji, NA. School closure during novel influenza: a systematic review. J Infect Publ Health. (2018) 11:657–61. doi: 10.1016/j.jiph.2018.01.003 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 31. Uscher-Pines, L, Schwartz, HL, Ahmed, F, Zheteyeva, Y, Meza, E, Baker, G, et al. School practices to promote social distancing in K-12 schools: review of influenza pandemic policies and practices. BMC Publ Health. (2018) 18:406. doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-5302-3 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 32. Jefferson, T, Del Mar, CB, Dooley, L, Ferroni, E, Al-Ansary, LA, Bawazeer, GA, et al. Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses. Cochr Datab Syst Rev. (2020) 2020:77, CD006207–80. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006207.pub5 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 33. Soh, SE, Cook, AR, Chen, MI, Lee, VJ, Cutter, JL, Chow, VT, et al. Teacher led school-based surveillance can allow accurate tracking of emerging infectious diseases - evidence from serial cross-sectional surveys of febrile respiratory illness during the H1N1 2009 influenza pandemic in Singapore. BMC Infect Dis. (2012) 12:336. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-12-336 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 34. Chen, T, Zhao, B, Liu, R, Zhang, X, Xie, Z, and Chen, S. Simulation of key interventions for seasonal influenza outbreak control at school in Changsha, China. J. Int. Med. Res. (2020) 48:030006051876426. doi: 10.1177/0300060518764268 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 35. Cui, A, Xie, Z, Xu, J, Hu, K, Zhu, R, Li, Z, et al. Comparative analysis of the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of human influenza virus versus human respiratory syncytial virus versus human metapneumovirus infection in nine provinces of China during 2009-2021. J Med Virol. (2022) 94:5894–903. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28073 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 36. Sato, T, Akita, T, and Tanaka, J. Evaluation of strategies for control and prevention of pandemic influenza (H1N1pdm) in Japanese children attending school in a rural town. Simulation using mathematical models. Jap J Publ Health. (2013) 60:204–11. doi: 10.11236/jph.60.4_204 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 37. Fisher, D, Hui, DS, Gao, Z, Lee, C, Oh, MD, Cao, B, et al. Pandemic response lessons from influenza H1N1 2009 in Asia. Respirology. (2011) 16:876–82. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1843.2011.02003.x PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 38. Pannaraj, PS, Wang, HL, Rivas, H, Wiryawan, H, Smit, M, Green, N, et al. School-located influenza vaccination decreases laboratory-confirmed influenza and improves school attendance. Clin Infect Dis. (2014) 59:325–32. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu340 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 39. Robertson, JS, and Inglis, SC. Prospects for controlling future pandemics of influenza. Virus Res. (2011) 162:39–46. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.09.024 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 40. Sun, Y, Wang, Q, Wang, X, Wu, S, Zhang, Y, Pan, Y, et al. Interruption of influenza transmission under public health emergency response for COVID-19: a study based on real-world data from Beijing. China Jpn J Inf Dis. (2022) 75:511–8. doi: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2021.786 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 41. Su, CP, Tsou, TP, Chen, CH, Lin, TY, and Chang, SC. Seasonal influenza prevention and control in Taiwan-strategies revisited. J Formosan Med Assoc. (2019) 118:657–63. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2018.12.022 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 42. Hadler, JL. Public health strategies for distribution of influenza vaccine during an influenza pandemic. Yale J Biol Med. (2005) 78:277–86. doi: 10.5372eq/032.2005 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 43. Principi, N, Esposito, S, and Marchisio, P. Present and future of influenza prevention in pediatrics. Expert Opin Biol Ther. (2011) 11:641–53. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2011.562495 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 44. Velicia Peñas, C, Del Campo Pérez, VM, Rivero Calle, I, Armenteros Del Olmo, L, Pérez Rodríguez, MT, and Gestal Otero, JJ. Expert opinion on strategies to improve vaccination coverage against seasonal influenza. Rev Esp Quimioter. (2022, 2022) 35:435–43. doi: 10.37201eq/031.2022 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 45. Noah, DL, and Noah, JW. Adapting global influenza management strategies to address emerging viruses. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. (2013) 305:L108–17. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00105.2013 PubMed Abstract | Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar 46. Li, C, Ren, RQ, and Zhou, L. A review on the preparedness plans on influenza pandemics, by WHO and China: the current status and development. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. (2018) 39:1032–5. chi. doi: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0254-6450.2018.08.004 Crossref Full Text | Google Scholar Keywords: influenza, disease cluster, influenza vaccine, health knowledge, school outbreak Citation: Shi Y, Xu L, Jiang H, Cai Y, Bao C and Liu W (2024) Analysis of factors influencing influenza outbreaks in schools in Taicang City, China. Front. Public Health. 12:1409004. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2024.1409004 Received: 29 March 2024; Accepted: 08 July 2024; Published: 19 July 2024. Edited by: George Karani, Cardiff Metropolitan University, United Kingdom Reviewed by: Charles J. Vukotich Jr, University of Pittsburgh, United States Ronald Balczon, University of South Alabama, United States Copyright © 2024 Shi, Xu, Jiang, Cai, Bao and Liu. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms. *Correspondence: Changjun Bao, bao2000_cn@163.com; Wendong Liu, 979446724@qq.com †These authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship Disclaimer: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article or claim that may be made by its manufacturer is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. Footer Guidelines Author guidelinesEditor guidelinesPolicies and publication ethicsFee policy Explore ArticlesResearch Topics Journals Outreach Frontiers Forum Frontiers Policy Labs Frontiers for Young Minds Connect Help centerEmails and alerts Contact us SubmitCareer opportunities Follow us © 2024 Frontiers Media S.A. All rights reserved Privacy policy | Terms and conditions“One and done”: promise for a universal influenza vaccine • healthcare-in-europe.com Deutsch Publications LABBook RADBook Media Kits Events Newsletter Contact Latest News Diagnostic imaging Laboratory/pathology Treatment Management IT/Tech Research Jonah Sacha, PhD, senior co-author of the new study, says the research could lead to a universal influenza vaccine within five years.Image source: OHSU; photo: Christine Torres Hicks News • Immunology “One and done”: promise for a universal influenza vaccine US researchers use an innovative vaccine platform to target interior of virus; scientists validate theory using 1918 flu virus New research led by Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU) reveals a promising approach to developing a universal influenza vaccine — a so-called “one and done” vaccine that confers lifetime immunity against an evolving virus. The study, published in the journal Nature Communications, tested an OHSU-developed vaccine platform against the virus considered most likely to trigger the next pandemic. Researchers reported the vaccine generated a robust immune response in nonhuman primates that were exposed to the avian H5N1 influenza virus. But the vaccine wasn’t based on the contemporary H5N1 virus; instead, the primates were inoculated against the influenza virus of 1918 that killed millions of people worldwide. “It’s exciting because in most cases, this kind of basic science research advances the science very gradually; in 20 years, it might become something,” said senior author Jonah Sacha, PhD, professor and chief of the Division of Pathobiology at OHSU’s Oregon National Primate Research Center. “This could actually become a vaccine in five years or less.” The problem with influenza is that it’s not just one virus. Like Sars-CoV-2, it’s always evolving the next variant and we’re always left to chase where the virus was, not where it’s going to beJonah SachaResearchers reported that six of 11 nonhuman primates inoculated against the virus that circulated a century ago — the 1918 flu — survived exposure to one of the deadliest viruses in the world today, H5N1. In contrast, a control group of six unvaccinated primates exposed to the H5N1 virus succumbed to the disease. Sacha said he believes the platform “absolutely” could be useful against other mutating viruses, including the coronavirus Sars-CoV-2. “It’s a very viable approach,” he said. “For viruses of pandemic potential, it’s critical to have something like this. We set out to test influenza, but we don’t know what’s going to come next.” A senior co-author from the University of Pittsburgh concurred. “Should a deadly virus such as H5N1 infect a human and ignite a pandemic, we need to quickly validate and deploy a new vaccine,” said co-corresponding author Douglas Reed, PhD, associate professor of immunology at the University of Pittsburgh Center for Vaccine Research. This approach harnesses a vaccine platform previously developed by scientists at OHSU to fight HIV and tuberculosis, and in fact is already being used in a clinical trial against HIV. The method involves inserting small pieces of target pathogens into the common herpes virus cytomegalovirus, or CMV, which infects most people in their lifetimes and typically produces mild or no symptoms. The virus acts as a vector specifically designed to induce an immune response from the body’s own T cells. This approach differs from common vaccines — including the existing flu vaccines — which are designed to induce an antibody response that targets the most recent evolution of the virus, distinguished by the arrangement of proteins covering the exterior surface. “The problem with influenza is that it’s not just one virus,” Sacha said. “Like Sars-CoV-2, it’s always evolving the next variant and we’re always left to chase where the virus was, not where it’s going to be.” The immunity induced by the vaccine was sufficient to limit virus infection and lung damage, protecting the monkeys from this very serious infectionSimon Barratt-BoyesThe spike proteins on the virus exterior surface evolve to elude antibodies. In the case of flu, vaccines are updated regularly using a best estimate of the next evolution of the virus. Sometimes it’s accurate, sometimes less so. In contrast, a specific type of T cell in the lungs, known as effector memory T cell, targets the internal structural proteins of the virus, rather than its continually mutating outer envelope. This internal structure doesn’t change much over time — presenting a stationary target for T cells to search out and destroy any cells infected by an old or newly evolved influenza virus. To test their T cell theory, researchers designed a CMV-based vaccine using the 1918 influenza virus as a template. Working within a highly secure biosafety level 3 laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh, they exposed the vaccinated nonhuman primates to small particle aerosols containing the avian H5N1 influenza virus — an especially severe virus that is currently circulating among dairy cows in the United States. Remarkably, six of the 11 vaccinated primates survived the exposure, despite the century-long period of virus evolution. “It worked because the interior protein of the virus was so well preserved,” Sacha said. “So much so, that even after almost 100 years of evolution, the virus can’t change those critically important parts of itself.” The study raises the potential for developing a protective vaccine against H5N1 in people. “Inhalation of aerosolized H5N1 influenza virus causes a cascade of events that can trigger respiratory failure,” said co-senior author Simon Barratt-Boyes, PhD, professor of infectious diseases, microbiology and immunology at Pitt. “The immunity induced by the vaccine was sufficient to limit virus infection and lung damage, protecting the monkeys from this very serious infection.” By synthesizing more up-to-date virus templates, the new study suggests CMV vaccines may be able to generate an effective, long-lasting immune response against a wide suite of new variants. “I think it means within five to 10 years, a one-and-done shot for influenza is realistic,” Sacha said. The same CMV platform developed by OHSU researchers has advanced to a clinical trial to protect against HIV, and a recent publication by those scientists suggests it may even be useful targeting specific cancer cells. The HIV clinical trial is being led by Vir Biotechnology, which licensed the vaccine platform from OHSU. Sacha sees the development as the latest in the rapid advance of medical research to treat or prevent disease. “It’s a massive sea change within our lifetimes,” Sacha said. “There is no question we are on the cusp of the next generation of how we address infectious disease.” In addition to OHSU, research institutions involved in the study included the Tulane National Primate Research Center, the University of Pittsburgh, the University of Washington, and the Washington National Primate Research Center at the UW. Source: Oregon Health & Science University 19.07.2024 More on the subject:immune system (211) infections (706) prevention (657) research (3195) virus (302) Contact …Read all latest stories Related articles News • Tricky virusMeasles infections erase 'immune memory' – vaccination confers protectionMeasles infections are not harmless – they can cause disease courses that may be of fatal outcome. Researchers of the Paul-Ehrlich-Institut (PEI) in co-operation with researchers from the UK and…#immune system#infections#prevention#research#virusNews • Preventing EBV reactivationLiver transplantation: Finding the "sweet spot" of immuno-suppressionDutch physicians have developed a system to determine the right dose of immunosuppressive drugs for patients to receive a donor liver - to prevent the activation of the Epstein-Barr virus.#immune system#infections#liver#prevention#transplantations#virusNews • Simulated droplet infectionWatching viruses fail (and what it can tell us about antiviral surfaces)Researchers tracked viruses passing through face masks and compared their failure on the filter layers of different mask types. This could accelerate the development of surfaces that can kill viruses.#coronavirus#infections#microscopy#prevention#research#virus Related products ImmunoassaysBeckman Coulter · Access High Sensitivity Troponin I (hsTnI)Beckman Coulter DiagnosticsImmunoassaysBeckman Coulter · Access Procalcitonin (PCT)Beckman Coulter DiagnosticsImmunoassaysMindray Medical · CL-1000i/1200i Chemiluminescence Immunoassay SystemShenzhen Mindray Bio-Medical Electronics Co., LtdImmunoassaysMindray Medical · CL-2000i Chemiluminescence Immunoassay SystemShenzhen Mindray Bio-Medical Electronics Co., LtdImmunoassaysMindray Medical · CL-6000i Chemiluminescence Immunoassay SystemShenzhen Mindray Bio-Medical Electronics Co., LtdImmunoassaysMindray Medical · CL-900i Chemiluminescence Immunoassay SystemShenzhen Mindray Bio-Medical Electronics Co., Ltd CategoriesDiagnostic imaging Laboratory/pathology Treatment Management IT/Tech Research More OffersCollections RADBook LABBook Manufacturer-IndexGet in TouchFacebookTwitterVimeoLinkedInRSS-FeedGeneralMedia KitsNewsletterContactNachhaltigkeits- und MenschenrechtsstandardsSocial Governance CodexPrivacy policyImprint To Homepage? Subscribe to NewsletterI am interested in ... ------------------------- All topics Surgery Health IT Oncology Research Cardiology Neurology Laboratory Pathology Radiology Ultrasound Subscribe now privacy agreement Home Deutsch Latest News Diagnostic imaging Laboratory/pathology Treatment Management IT/Tech Research Collections Manufacturer-Index Publications LABBook RADBook Media Kits Events Newsletter Contact This website uses cookies to give our readers the best website experience. Please refer to our privacy policy to find out how we use cookies and how you can edit your preferences.Refuse cookiesAccept cookiesSixth human case of bird flu reported in Colorado, CDC says | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback Sixth human case of bird flu reported in Colorado, CDC says By Maya Davis, CNN 2 minute read Published 7:19 PM EDT, Fri July 19, 2024 Link Copied! Dr. Jon Arizti Sanz of the Broad institute's Sabeti Lab in Cambridge, Massachusetts, tests milk from local grocery stores for bird flu. David L. Ryan/The Boston Globe/Getty Images CNN — A new human case of H5 highly pathogenic avian flu has been identified in Colorado, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Friday. The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment said Sunday that five human cases of bird flu had been detected in poultry workers believed to have caught the bird flu virus through direct work with infected birds. The latest case is from an additional worker from this cohort. Avian influenza research DigicomPhoto/Science Photo Library/Getty Images Related article Colorado bird flu cases show how extreme heat may be complicating efforts to control the virus The workers had been involved in culling birds, a process used to control the spread of disease by selectively removing or killing infected animals. The six infected workers have experienced mild symptoms, including pink eye and respiratory issues, and all exposed workers have been offered antiviral medication, according to the CDC. Genetic sequencing of a sample from one of the Colorado cases shows that it’s closely related to the first human case of bird flu discovered in Michigan, a sign that the virus has not experienced any changes due to antiviral resistance, according to the agency. These findings are “reassuring,” it said Friday. A CDC field team, including epidemiologists, veterinarians, clinicians and an industrial hygienist, is assisting with Colorado’s outbreak investigation. Since April, there have been 10 reported human cases of avian influenza in the US, four linked to exposure to sick dairy cows and six connected to infected poultry, according to the CDC. Friday’s confirmation includes the latest case in Colorado. Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Friday from the CNN Health team. The virus has affected 18.32 million birds from 34 commercial flocks and 16 backyard flocks since April. The US Department of Agriculture is also reporting a growing number of infected cattle, with confirmed cases in 157 dairy cow herds across 13 states. The organizations say they are working to respond to the ongoing “public health challenge” posed by the multistate outbreak of bird flu. In part of this effort, the full sequence of the detected virus has been made available to the public so researchers in the US and around the world can analyze it. In humans, the CDC’s risk assessment for the general public remains low. Poultry products are still safe to eat if they have been properly handled and cooked, the Colorado health department says. The CDC advises that everyone avoid close or long exposure to sick or dead animals, animal poop or bedding. Experts also recommend against consuming unpasteurized or raw milk due to the potential for contamination. Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.Troy Sutton named Huck Early Career Chair in Virology | Penn State UniversityPenn StateHuck Institutes of the Life SciencesTroy Sutton named Huck Early Career Chair in VirologyTroy Sutton, Huck Early Career Chair in Virology and assistant professor of veterinary and biomedical science. Credit: Penn State. Creative CommonsExpandJuly 19, 2024By Cole HonsUNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. — Troy Sutton, assistant professor of veterinary and biomedical sciences in the College of Agricultural Sciences at Penn State, has been awarded a Dorothy Foehr Huck and J. Lloyd Huck Early Career Chair in Virology. Sutton investigates influenza virus transmission and evolution, and his lab works with several animal models including birds and rodents. Currently, he is focused on viruses in the H5N1 family that are responsible for the recent outbreaks of bird flu in cattle. “I am fascinated by pandemic influenza viruses and how they evolve from animal reservoirs,” said Sutton. “The natural reservoir for influenza viruses are wild aquatic birds, and these viruses have spilled over into several other animal species. As a result, we cannot eradicate influenza.” Sutton’s approach has been to closely study pandemic influenza viruses to gain actionable insights. This information can then be used not only to help better predict which viruses are likely to cause a pandemic, but also to develop improved vaccines that can slow or prevent the spread of influenza viruses in humans. “Both goals are really focused on improving pandemic preparedness and reducing the disease burden of future influenza pandemics,” Sutton said. During his term as Huck Chair, Sutton hopes to elevate influenza research at Penn State and advocate for a stronger virology community on campus. Sandeep Prabhu, department head and professor of veterinary and biomedical sciences reflected on Sutton’s contributions. “Troy's expertise as a virologist focused on viral transmission dynamics for highly efficacious control strategies has fostered valuable collaborations both within the University and with the broader scientific community. As new and emerging viruses pose increasing threats, his research will be essential in developing innovative treatments to prevent future outbreaks from escalating to pandemic levels.” Patrick Drew, interim director of the Huck Institutes, said, “Understanding the mechanisms of how viruses can evolve to infect new host species is critical for preventing future pandemics. Troy’s work goes to the heart of this important question, and the Huck is excited to be able to support his impactful and interdisciplinary work.” Sutton completed his undergraduate and graduate training at the University of British Columbia. His master’s and doctoral research focused on Respiratory Syncytial Virus. Sutton then transitioned to the study of influenza viruses during postdoctoral research at the University of Maryland and National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Last Updated July 19, 2024TagsAcademicsFaculty AchievementFaculty and StaffUniversity ParkAgricultural SciencesDepartment of Veterinary and Biomedical SciencesHuck Institutes of the Life SciencesCenter for Infectious Disease DynamicsGet the news by emailSubscribeFacebookTwitterLinkedinInstagramGet News By EmailDiscover NewsExploreNewsCareersFacts and RankingsCollegesCampusesHealth CareResearchImpactResourcesProspective StudentsCurrent StudentsInternational StudentsBusiness and IndustryVeterans and MilitaryVisitorsFaculty and StaffAlumniMediaCOVID-19 InformationPopular LinksMapsDirectoryLibrariesAcademic CalendarLionPATHStay ConnectedEmails / HeadlinesEmergency NotificationsPenn State GoStrategic CommunicationsReport MisconductPolice201 Old Main, University Park, PA 16802814-865-4700Contact UsNon DiscriminationEqual OpportunityAccessibilityLegal StatementsThe Pennsylvania State UniversityThe Pennsylvania State University © 2024Millions of birds have died. How to stop humans dying, tooThe EconomistThe Economist/>Skip to contentMenuWeekly editionThe world in briefSearchLog inOpinionLeadersLetters to the editorBy InvitationCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceWorldThe world this weekChinaUnited StatesEuropeBritainMiddle East & AfricaAsiaThe AmericasInternationalA-Z of international relationsA-Z of military termsA-Z of US politicsUS election poll trackerIn depthScience & technologyBriefingGraphic detailThe Economist explainsSpecial reportsTechnology QuarterlyEssaySchools briefBusiness & economicsFinance & economicsBusinessBig Mac indexA-Z of economicsEconomic & financial indicatorsCulture & society1843 magazineCultureObituaryThe Economist readsChristmas SpecialsMorePodcastsNewslettersFilmsThe Economist appSecureDropSubscriber eventsEconomist Education coursesEconomist EnterpriseMy EconomistSaved storiesLog outSaved storiesAccountLog outSearchSearchTry AI-powered searchLeaders | Avian influenzaMillions of birds have died. How to stop humans dying, tooAs isolated human cases of H5N1 emerge, now is the time to prepare Photograph: Science Photo Library Jul 17th 2024ShareOver the past couple of years the largest outbreak of avian influenza (h5n1) in recorded history has torn across the planet. The virus, which is deadly to birds, has devastated wild and domesticated flocks alike. Attempts to stop transmission have seen hundreds of millions of birds culled on farms since the strain was first identified in 1996. Wild bird deaths are probably in their millions at least. The danger is that, as the virus mutates, a bird pandemic becomes a human one. Precisely how h5n1 will adapt and spread is impossible to predict. But the time to prepare is now.Explore moreCoronavirusThis article appeared in the Leaders section of the print edition under the headline “What to do about bird flu”Leaders July 20th 2024Euphoric markets are ignoring growing political risksWhere would Donald Trump and J.D. Vance take America?Gaza could become “Mogadishu on the Med”To halt Brazil’s decline, Lula needs to cut runaway public spendingMillions of birds have died. How to stop humans dying, tooHow Labour should reform Britain’s overstuffed prisonsFrom the July 20th 2024 editionDiscover stories from this section and more in the list of contentsExplore the editionShareReuse this contentDiscover moreWhy open-source AI models are good for the world Their critics dwell on the dangers and underestimate the benefits Europe needs to wake up and look after itselfThe biggest obstacle is Germany, which now urgently needs electionsA scourge that damages babies’ brains is coming back Yet iodine deficiency is startlingly easy to prevent How to protect India’s shareholder capitalism from itselfA surge in equity investment is threatened by risky derivatives tradingWelcome to Trump’s worldHis sweeping victory will shake up everythingHow to avoid anarchy in Antarctica All that stands between the status quo and chaos is a fragile treatySubscribeEconomist EnterpriseReuse our contentHelp and contact usKeep updatedLinkedInFacebookXInstagramThreadsTikTokYouTubeRSSPublished since September 1843 to take part in “a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.” The EconomistAboutAdvertisePress centreSecureDropThe Economist GroupThe Economist GroupEconomist IntelligenceEconomist ImpactEconomist Impact EventsWorking hereEconomist Education CoursesExecutive JobsTo enhance your experience and ensure our website runs smoothly, we use cookies and similar technologies.Manage CookiesTerms of UsePrivacyCookie PolicyAccessibilityModern Slavery StatementSitemapYour Data RightsCopyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2024. All rights reserved.Dog flu outbreak in Delaware halts animal shelter transports - WHYY Skip to content BBC World Service Listen Live Listen Live Next Morning Edition NPR's Morning Edition takes listeners around the country and the world with two hours of multi-faceted stories and commentaries that inform, challenge and occasionally amuse. Morning Edition is the most listened-to news radio program in the country. WHYY rewind play fast-forward Radio Schedule WHYY DONATE Primary Menu News Radio & Podcasts Radio Schedule Ways to Listen WHYY Listen App TV TV Schedule Live TV Watch on Demand Stream PBS Kids Arts Events Education Your Learning Neighborhood For Students For Educators Pathways to Media Careers WHYY Media Labs Youth Media Awards Support WHYY Membership WHYY Passport WHYY Member Portal Sponsorship Vehicle Donation Program 70 for 70 Legacy Challenge Volunteer Search for: NEWSLETTERS DONATE CommunityAnimalsDelawarePublic Health FacebookTwitterEmail Dog flu outbreak halts out-of-state transports at Delaware animal shelters The suspension of out-of-state transports comes at a time when many Delaware Valley animal shelters are grappling with overcrowding. ByJohnny Perez-GonzalezJuly 19, 2024 A puppy from the Brandywine Valley SPCA is seen in a file photo. (Facebook/BVSPCA) From Philly and the Pa. suburbs to South Jersey and Delaware, what would you like WHYY News to cover? Let us know! Animal shelters throughout Delaware are grappling with a canine influenza outbreak, which has prompted the state to suspend out-of-state transports, intakes and adoptions for 30 days. The state veterinarian’s control order comes after the Office of Animal Welfare alerted the Department of Agriculture of the rise in respiratory disease. “This outbreak is going on amongst dogs in several shelters throughout the state of Delaware,” said Karen Lopez, the state of Delaware veterinarian. She and other veterinarians took proactive measures to investigate the issue, she said, exploring potential causes and identifying different strains affecting the animals. WHYY thanks our sponsors — become a WHYY sponsor “Some initial results we got back indicated that a pathogen called mycoplasma cynos was part of the problem, but we’ve gotten some additional information back that we have two different strains of canine influenza as well as adenovirus that are affecting some of the dogs and making them very sick with kennel cough,” she said, referring to the more common name for canine infectious respiratory disease complex. For Delaware’s affected dog population, the illness has shown a severe impact, resulting in the deaths of two dogs. “Those results that some of the dogs have influenza and adenovirus is consistent with a more serious illness,” she said. “Some of the dogs have developed pneumonia and there have even been two dogs that have died or have been euthanized at our emergency clinics in the area.” One shelter significantly affected by the outbreak is Humane Animal Partners, which operates three locations in Wilmington, Christiana and Rehoboth. Related Content Community The clock is ticking: Amid overcrowding concerns, ACCT Philly is paying people to foster dogs and cats The city’s only open-intake animal shelter is holding a foster drive in an effort to ease severe overcrowding — and save the lives of time-stamped dogs. 4 months ago HAP CEO Patrick Carroll said its Wilmington location is significantly affected. The first dog became ill during the second weekend of July. “We ended up sending him to Blue Pearl emergency because of that and then he just declined. He had pneumonia after the chest X-ray, very bad pneumonia, not hopeful in any way, so we had to let him go,” he said. “Then we just kept getting more and more dogs getting sick.” To date, approximately 30 infected dogs are being treated in the facility. “[We’re] isolating them, but then they have supportive care which can be [giving them] fluids, some antibiotics to help with the potential of other illnesses,” he explained. “Then if they get to the point where they need a nebulizer, some of our vet techs are using a nebulizer on them as well.” WHYY thanks our sponsors — become a WHYY sponsor While the outbreak remains confined to shelter facilities, state officials say it’s crucial to recognize that the disease is contagious and could potentially spread to other public and larger spots such as boarding facilities, grooming salons, doggy daycares and dog parks. Pet owners should be vigilant for signs of illness related to the outbreak, which may include lethargy, loss of appetite, nasal discharge and difficulty breathing. “We do have kennel cough vaccines, we have adenovirus vaccines, we have a canine influenza vaccine, so [we encourage] people to talk to their veterinarians about how appropriate those vaccines are for their dogs and make sure that they’re on time for boosters, which may be every one year or every tree years depending on the formulation of the vaccine,” state vet Lopez advised. The halt in out-of-state transports comes at a time when many Delaware Valley animal shelters are grappling with overcrowding. ACCT Philly, Philadelphia’s only open-intake animal shelter, is currently paying people to foster cats and dogs as a way to free up desperately needed space. In Delaware, veterinarians on the front lines and caregivers in shelters are encouraging community members to support and assist these animals by calling their location to inquire about their needs, as resources are limited. Those interested in helping area shelters may make monetary or supply donations or foster an animal to help organizations accommodate the strain on their limited shelter space. Get daily updates from WHYY News! The free WHYY News Daily newsletter delivers the most important local stories to your inbox. Enter your email here Share thisFacebookTwitterEmail WHYY is your source for fact-based, in-depth journalism and information. As a nonprofit organization, we rely on financial support from readers like you. Please give today. You may also like Community The clock is ticking: Amid overcrowding concerns, ACCT Philly is paying people to foster dogs and cats The city’s only open-intake animal shelter is holding a foster drive in an effort to ease severe overcrowding — and save the lives of time-stamped dogs. 4 months ago Community Camden County’s Homeward Bound animal shelter is at full capacity and urgently seeking adopters The New Jersey animal rescue, like many in the Philadelphia region, continues to see a number of owner surrenders for pets who were adopted mid-pandemic. 4 months ago Community A South Jersey animal shelter is creating a baseball ‘Field of Dreams’ for dogs and cats looking for forever homes The Burlington County Animal Shelter is holding a baseball-themed adoption event that features a dog-cat contest. 7 months ago About Johnny Perez-Gonzalez Johnny Perez-Gonzalez reports on the state of Delaware for WHYY News. Read more @johnnyperez__ JPerez-Gonzalez@whyy.org WHYY thanks our sponsors — become a WHYY sponsor WHYY thanks our sponsors — become a WHYY sponsor Latest News Delaware County community hosts parade, special events in honor of Veterans Day 3 hours ago Senate race is close in Pa., provisional ballots may make the difference. Does yours need to be ‘fixed?’ 3 hours ago Local groups honor gun violence victims in Philly and its suburbs 5 hours ago Listen 1:00 Want a digest of WHYY’s programs, events & stories? Sign up for our weekly newsletter. Enter your email here Together we can reach 100% of WHYY’s fiscal year goal Donate Learn about WHYY Member benefits Ways to Donate WHYY WHYY provides trustworthy, fact-based, local news and information and world-class entertainment to everyone in our community. WHYY offers a voice to those not heard, a platform to share everyone’s stories, a foundation to empower early and lifelong learners and a trusted space for unbiased news. Learn more about Social Responsibility at WHYY. It’s how we live. Contact Us Philadelphia 215.351.1200 talkback@whyy.org Delaware 302.516.7506 talkback@whyy.org Our Programs Albie’s Elevator Art Outside Billy Penn Check, Please! Philly The Connection Delishtory Flicks Fresh Air Good Souls The Infinite Art Hunt Movers & Makers On Stage at Curtis Peak Travel Philadelphia Revealed PlanPhilly The Pulse Schooled The Statue Stop and Frisk: Revisit or Resist Studio 2 Things To Do Voices in the Family WHYY News Climate Desk You Oughta Know Young Creators Studio Young, Unhoused and Unseen Your Democracy Inside WHYY About Social Responsibility at WHYY Board and Executives Community Advisory Board Frequently Asked Questions Employment Internships Press Room Meet Our Newsroom WHYY News Style Guide WHYY Productions WHYY Spaces Submissions History Directions Coverage Area Financial Statements WHYY Community Report Supporters Privacy Meet Our Newsroom Employment Lifelong Learning Award N.I.C.E. Initiative Contact Us Sponsorship Directions FCC Public Files FCC Applications Follow Us Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube Sign up for a Newsletter © MMXXIV WHYY Privacy Policy Terms of Use for WHYY.org WHYY is partnered withInfluenza viruses can use two ways to infect | EurekAlert! Advanced Search Home News Releases Multimedia Meetings Login Register News Release 17-Jul-2024 Influenza viruses can use two ways to infect cells Peer-Reviewed Publication University of Zurich image: Electron microscopy image of influenza viruses. view more Credit: CDC/Science Photo Library Most influenza viruses enter human or animal cells through specific pathways on the cells’ surface. Researchers at the University of Zurich have now discovered that certain human flu viruses and avian flu viruses can also use a second entry pathway, a protein complex of the immune system, to infect cells. This ability helps the viruses infect different species – and potentially jump between animals and humans. The majority of type A influenza viruses circulating in birds and pigs aren’t normally a health risk for humans. However, the viruses may pose a threat if there is an outbreak like the one currently in dairy cattle in the US or during seasonal epidemics. In rare cases, a virus can jump from animals to humans – with potentially devastating consequences such as a global pandemic. Additional receptor offers alternative entry pathway Most influenza viruses enter host cells by using their envelope proteins, which stand up from the surface like spikes. The so-called hemagglutinin binds to sialic acid, a chemical group on the surface of human cells and the cells of various animal species. An international research team led by Professor Silke Stertz from the Institute of Medical Virology at the University of Zurich (UZH) has now shown that flu viruses also have a second method to infect host cells. “Human influenza A viruses of subtype H2N2 and related H2N2 avian influenza viruses can enter cells through a second receptor. They use an alternative entry pathway,” says Stertz. The researchers found that hemagglutinin also binds to MHC class II protein complexes. These complexes on the surface of certain immune and respiratory cells are responsible for differentiating between the body’s own cells and foreign cells. “We found that MHC class II complexes in humans, pigs, ducks, swans and chickens allow viruses to enter cells, but not those in bats,” says Stertz. Transmission from animals to humans likely This dual ability to infect cells was observed in lab-grown cell lines and human airway cultures. How well the viral receptor fits onto the cell surface structures plays a crucial part in determining which host species and tissues are infected and ultimately how severe the infection will be. Receptor specificity also influences whether a virus is able to infect different animal species or even humans (zoonosis). “Our finding shows that influenza viruses can adapt to use different entry pathways. This might influence their ability to infect different species and potentially jump between animals and humans,” emphasizes the UZH virologist. The risk that avian, swine and other animal influenza viruses could trigger a flu pandemic in humans may thus be greater than previously assumed. The ability to use MHC class II proteins for cell entry could have been one of the reasons why H2N2 influenza viruses emerged as a pandemic virus in Asia back in 1957. This is another good reason to step up global influenza surveillance in both animals and humans. Journal Nature Microbiology DOI 10.1038/s41564-024-01771-1 Method of Research Experimental study Subject of Research Cells Article Title MHC class II proteins mediate sialic acid independent entry of human and avian H2N2 influenza A viruses Article Publication Date 17-Jul-2024 Disclaimer: AAAS and EurekAlert! are not responsible for the accuracy of news releases posted to EurekAlert! by contributing institutions or for the use of any information through the EurekAlert system. Media Contact Barbara Simpson University of Zurich barbara.simpson@uzh.ch Expert Contacts Prof. Dr. Silke Stertz Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich stertz.silke@virology.uzh.ch Office: +41 44 634 28 99 @UZH_Virology Dr. Umut Karakus Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich karakus.umut@virology.uzh.ch Office: +41 44 634 26 99 @UZH_Virology More on this News Release Influenza viruses can use two ways to infect cells University of Zurich Journal Nature Microbiology DOI 10.1038/s41564-024-01771-1 Keywords /Life sciences/Microbiology/Virology/Viruses/Influenza viruses /Health and medicine/Diseases and disorders/Infectious diseases/Microbial infections/Viral infections /Life sciences/Organismal biology/Animals/Vertebrates/Birds/Wild birds /Health and medicine/Diseases and disorders/Epidemics/Pandemic influenza /Health and medicine/Diseases and disorders/Infectious diseases /Health and medicine/Diseases and disorders/Infectious diseases/Microbial infections Copyright © 2024 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) facebook.com/EurekAlert @EurekAlert youtube.com/EurekAlert Help / FAQ Services Eligibility Guidelines Contact EurekAlert! Terms & Conditions DMCA Privacy Policy Disclaimer Copyright © 2024 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)H5N1 strikes another large layer farm in Colorado, dairy herd in Minnesota | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu H5N1 strikes another large layer farm in Colorado, dairy herd in Minnesota News brief Lisa Schnirring Topics Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) Share Copied to clipboard As Colorado continue its response to a highly pathogenic H5N1 avian flu outbreak at a massive egg-laying farm connected to five H5 illnesses in people working as poultry cullers, federal agriculture officials confirmed another outbreak at a large layer farm that houses 1.3 million birds. UGA CAES Extension, John Amis / Flickr cc Both of the layer farms are in Weld County in the northeastern corner of the state, where several outbreaks have been reported in dairy cattle.In other developments, Minnesota's Board of Animal Health reported another affected dairy herd, which is located in Stearns County in the central part of the state. Wastewater detection in ArkansasIn a new wastewater development, WastewaterSCAN reported a new H5 influenza detection in Arkansas involving the city of Harrison's wastewater treatment plant. No recent outbreaks or detections have been confirmed from the state. Wastewater detections aren't able to determine the source of the virus. WastewaterSCAN's H5 tracking has detected the virus in nine other states, all but one of which (California) has reported dairy cattle or poultry outbreaks.In other wastewater tracking, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that, across the 2 weeks ending July 6, no states were at the high level for influenza A, which can't distinguish H5N1 but can be a surveillance signal for health officials to explore the source. US COVID-19 activity continues to rise steadily News brief Lisa Schnirring Topics COVID-19 The latest COVID indicators from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) today showed more rises, with wastewater detections trending upward in all regions of the country, especially the West and South. Banc d'Imatges Infermeres, Ariadna Creus i Àngel García / Flickr cc The state of the nation's COVID activity this week was marked by President Joe Biden's announcement that he had tested positive for the virus. A letter from Biden's doctor, Kevin O'Connor, DO, yesterday said the president is still experiencing mild upper respiratory symptoms and that he continues to take Paxlovid.Surge in KP.3.1.1 detectionsIn its latest variant proportion projections, the CDC reported a big jump in KP.3.1.1 viruses, an offshoot of KP.3 that scientists this week said is poised to become dominant because of its higher infectivity and immune evasion. KP.3 and its relative, KP.3.1.1, together make up more than 50% of variant sequences.Among early indicators, the national test positivity rose to 12.6% last week, up 1.2 percentage points from the previous week, and were highest in the West and lowest in the Middle Atlantic states. Emergency department visits for COVID were also up slightly.Along with the CDC's report of high wastewater levels of SARS-CoV-2, WastewaterSCAN, a national wastewater monitoring system based at Stanford University in partnership with Emory University, notes that detections are in the high category, with no significant trend up or downward over the past 3 weeks. It said all regions of the country are in the high category, except for the Midwest, which is at the medium level.Hospitalizations for COVID are increasing, especially in people ages 65 and older, the CDC said in its weekly respiratory virus snapshot. Deaths from COVID showed no change from the previous week. Zika can have long-term consequences for immune system News brief Stephanie Soucheray, MA Topics Zika Kati Molin / iStock Only 5% of infants exposed to Zika virus in utero develop the physical or neurologic disabilities associated with congenital Zika syndrome, but new research published in eBioMedicine shows almost all children exposed to Zika in the womb may experience changes to the immune system.The study is based on a small cohort of Zika-exposed children followed up by researchers from the Cleveland Clinic and elsewhere, led by Suan-Sin Foo, PhD. In a press release from the Cleveland Clinic, Foo said her research fills in a missing gap in the Zika landscape."The medical field has a very specific definition of congenital Zika syndrome. The children must have impaired skull or brain development," said Foo. "The rest of these kids may not even have a note on their chart mentioning that their mother was infected during pregnancy. Unless they're part of our study, they're essentially lost to the medical field."The rest of these kids may not even have a note on their chart mentioning that their mother was infected during pregnancy.Forty-two Zika-exposed infants (ZEI) assessed at birth and 20 children exposed to Zika during pregnancy (ZEC, for Zika-exposed children) and assessed at age 2 years in Brazil provided blood samples and were compared to healthy controls. Researchers found high elevated levels of inflammation, even 2 years after the Zika virus infection was cleared.Altered response to childhood vaccines Moreover, the 2-year-olds showed an altered immune response to childhood vaccines in T-cell expression, with notably reduced anti-Diphtheria toxin and anti-Clostridium tetani Immunoglobulin G levels against diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis and measles, mumps, and rubella vaccines. The authors said their research will now shift to focusing on how to block Zika's effects during pregnancy. They added that their findings should encourage clinicians to broaden their understanding of congenital Zika syndrome. "Our study clearly shows that there's much more to this condition than meets the eye. We need to expand diagnostic criteria and conduct more research to make sure these immunologically vulnerable children get the care they need," said Foo. Death certificate analysis pushes European COVID toll 18% to 27% higher than official records News brief Mary Van Beusekom, MS Topics COVID-19 Victoria Pickering / Flickr cc The proportion of COVID-19 deaths in central Europe in 2020 and 2021 would have been up to 18% to 27% higher if death certificates listing the virus as a contributing condition had coded it as the cause of death, estimates a new study published in PLOS One.University of Warsaw-led researchers examined 187,300 death certificates from Austria, Bavaria (Germany), Czechia (Czech Republic), Lithuania, and Poland mentioning COVID-19 in 2020 and 2021. They performed a two-step analysis of cause-of-death association indicators (CDAIs) and contributing CDAIs to estimate the statistical strength of associations between COVID-19 and other conditions."Excess deaths reported to causes other than COVID-19 may have been due to unrecognised coronavirus disease, the interruptions in care in the overwhelmed health care facilities, or socioeconomic effects of the pandemic and lockdowns," the authors noted. "Death certificates provide exhaustive medical information, allowing us to assess the extent of unrecognised COVID-19 deaths."Many possible reasons for undercountA total of 15,700 death certificates listed COVID-19 as a contributing condition, and three of four recorded a statistically significant COVID-19 complication or pre-existing condition as the cause. Unrecognised coronavirus deaths were equivalent to the entire surplus of excess mortality beyond registered COVID-19 deaths in Austria and the Czech Republic, and its large proportion (25–31%) in Lithuania and Bavaria."In Austria, Bavaria, Czechia, and Lithuania the scale of COVID-19 mortality would have been up to 18–27% higher had COVID-19 been coded as the underlying cause of death," the researchers wrote. "Unrecognised coronavirus deaths were equivalent to the entire surplus of excess mortality beyond registered COVID-19 deaths in Austria and the Czech Republic, and its large proportion (25–31%) in Lithuania and Bavaria."The undercount may be attributable to a lack of COVID-19 testing, atypical disease course, misclassification, or deaths from other causes such as cardiovascular disease and cancers that may have risen as strained healthcare systems prioritized COVID-19 patients or fallen owing to the reduction of risk factors such as air pollution, traffic, or other infectious diseases. "Finally, mortality may have increased due to harmful behaviours typical of the socioeconomic instability experienced by some groups during the pandemics, lockdowns and economic slowdown, such as abuse of noxious substances, suicides and accidents," the researchers wrote. ALL BRIEFS In case you missed it Previous Next Last patient discharged from treatment in Rwanda’s Marburg outbreak Mpox plateaus in a DR Congo hot spot, rises in other African nations Arkansas, Montana report CWD infections in deer, elk Africa CDC launches trial of smallpox drug for mpox CDC reports slight flu rise in children, first kid's flu death of season CDC tracks rise in pertussis activity Quick takes: Polio in 7 countries, lab monkey escape, pneumonic tularemia in Colorado Surveillance turns up 18 previously undetected cases of tick-borne Yezo virus in China This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateStudy suggests earlier US-licensed H5N1 vaccines prompt antibodies to current strain | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu Study suggests earlier US-licensed H5N1 vaccines prompt antibodies to current strain Lisa Schnirring Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) Steve Mann / iStock Share Copied to clipboard Though federal health officials are moving ahead with a plan to produce 4.8 million doses of H5N1 avian influenza vaccine that targets the clade (strain) circulating globally and infecting US dairy herds and some farm workers, older H5N1 vaccines in the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) might be useful in a pinch.A team led by researchers from the US Food and Drug Administration looked at the ability of three H5N1 vaccines targeting three earlier H5N1 clades from Indonesia and Vietnam that circulated in the early 2000s to neutralize antibodies against the current 2.3.4.4b clade. All three are already licensed and are in the SNS. Two are adjuvanted, meaning they contain an immune-boosting substance. The group published its unedited findings yesterday in Nature Communications to provide early access to the new information.Newer vaccine still has some hoops to jumpAt a media briefing this week, federal health officials said H5N1 vaccination isn't yet recommended for farm workers exposed to animals that carry the virus, but discussions remain ongoing. Their rationale is that infections are mild, and they have seen no changes to suggest the virus is more transmissible or is poised to cause more severe disease.An official from the Department of Health and Human Services' Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response said the fill-and-finish of a vaccine specific to the current clade from bulk candidate vaccine is still on track, with the first doses to be delivered in July. However, once produced, the vaccine would still need to go through regulatory approval before doses are used in people.Earlier adjuvanted vaccines showed cross neutralizationIn conducting the study, the team used blood samples from 68 adults who had participated in earlier H5N1 vaccine trials. The hemagglutinin (HA) sequence of the 2.3.4.4b H5N1 clade has several mutations compared to the HA of the three H5N1 viruses targeted by the earlier vaccines.The researchers found that the two adjuvanted licensed H5N1 vaccines generated cross-reactive binding antibodies and cross-neutralization titers against the 2.3.4.4b clade."These findings suggest that the stockpiled U.S. licensed adjuvanted H5N1 vaccines generate cross-neutralizing antibodies against circulating HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b in humans and may be useful as bridging vaccines until updated H5N1 vaccines become available," they wrote.More H5N1 in cows, birds, small mammalsIn other H5N1 developments, the US Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) added three more confirmations, all from Colorado, to its list of H5N1 outbreaks in dairy farms. The nation's total is now 161 outbreaks across 13 states.APHIS also reported one more H5N1 detection in poultry, which involves a backyard flock of 30 birds in Idaho's Twin Falls County. It also reported 21 more detections in wild birds, several of which were agency-harvested birds in Sioux County, Iowa, where the virus has been detected in dairy herds. Other detections involved waterfowl and raptors found dead in other states, including California, Florida, and New York.Meanwhile, APHIS reported H5N1 in samples from 11 more mammals, mostly house mice in New Mexico's Roosevelt County. They also included a red fox in New York's Tomkins County and a raccoon in Iowa's Sioux County. Related news Previous Next Studies describe deadly avian flu outbreaks among seals, terns Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen Lisa Schnirring CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Lisa Schnirring California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases Lisa Schnirring Utah reports avian flu in dairy cows as USDA announces plan for bulk milk sampling Lisa Schnirring USDA announces first H5N1 avian flu detection in US pigs Lisa Schnirring H5N1 avian flu isolate from dairy worker is transmissible, lethal in animals Lisa Schnirring This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateState, federal agencies keeping close eye on avian influenza Open in Our App Get the best experience and stay connected to your community with our Spectrum News app. Learn More Open in Spectrum News App Continue in Browser Toggle navigation Hawaii EDIT WATCH LIVE | Recent Activity Log Out Recent Activity Log In Latest News Weather Today's Forecast 7 Day Forecast Interactive Radar Watches and Warnings Surf Forecast Storm Season Maui Wildfires Politics Washington D.C. Bureau Local & State Politics Election Results HI Out & About Podcasts All Podcasts Lakeshow The People's People What Could Be Sports Our Journalists ACCOUNT Sign Out Recent Activity ACCOUNT Sign In Recent Activity Latest News Weather Today's Forecast 7 Day Forecast Interactive Radar Watches and Warnings Surf Forecast Storm Season Maui Wildfires Politics Washington D.C. Bureau Local & State Politics Election Results HI Out & About Podcasts All Podcasts Lakeshow The People's People What Could Be Sports Our Journalists × Set Weather Location Get hyperlocal forecasts, radar and weather alerts. Please enter a valid zipcode. Save Confirm Your News Market We automatically picked the Spectrum News market we think is most relevant to you. New York City News and information that matter to your community. Local weather forecasts. Confirm Change News Market You can change your news market at any time. The Hawaii DOH has asked for an increase of H5N1 sampling in migratory birds, especially the kÅlea, Pacific Golden Plover, when they return to the islands in the fall. (Getty Images/Manakin) State, federal agencies keeping close eye on avian influenza By Spectrum News Staff Honolulu PUBLISHED 2:07 PM ET Jul. 14, 2024 PUBLISHED 2:07 PM EDT Jul. 14, 2024 SHARE HONOLULU â According to the Hawaii Department of Health, Hawaii is the only state in which the H5N1 influenza has not been detected, and state and federal agencies are working to keep it that way. What You Need To Know Itâs safe to consume pasteurized milk or cheese say health officials, but raw milk can carry the live virus and should be avoided Partnering with the state and federal Departments of Agriculture and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Hawaii DOH is working to reinforce existing efforts to detect avian influenza in birds, cattle and humans throughout the state Information on H5N1 risks in Hawaii and prevention tips is available on the Avian Influenza website The influenza A strain associated with highly pathogenic avian influenza is typically carried and transmitted by birds and has also been referred to as avian or bird flu. It has infected dairy cows in various states, including four people who worked closely with the infected cows. Itâs safe to consume pasteurized milk or cheese, say health officials, but raw milk can carry the live virus and should be avoided. Partnering with the state and federal Departments of Agriculture and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Hawaii DOH is working to reinforce existing efforts to detect avian influenza in birds, cattle and humans throughout the state. This includes monitoring human influenza infections found in the laboratory, monitoring influenza in wastewater and tracking Emergency Department visits for influenza in the Hawaii Respiratory Disease Activity Summary dashboard. Information on H5N1 risks in Hawaii and prevention tips is available on the Avian Influenza website. According to Hawaii DOH, the Hawaii Department of Agriculture issued an advisory on April 5 to prevent cattle being imported to Hawaii from areas where H5N1 had been detected or suspected. It required the inspection of cattle coming from affected states within 72 hours of shipment and that they be free of clinical signs of the bird influenza. Beginning April 27, the U.S. Department of Agriculture placed a nationwide restriction on the movement of lactating cows that requires testing of the animals for H5N1 before they are moved. Testing is routinely conducted on domestic and wild birds, and incidents of high mortality are investigated to check for the presence of H5N1. The HDOA focuses on domestic poultry and the U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Department of Agriculture Wildlife Services focus on wild birds. Wild birds - The Hawaii State Laboratory receives and tests specimens collected by USGS from live wild birds. Over 100 tests conducted since 2022 have shown negative results. DOH has requested an increase in sampling, especially of migratory birds such as the kÅlea (Pacific Golden Plover) when they return in the fall. Domestic poultry - Hawaii DOH said HSL has conducted H5N1 tests on samples from hundreds of birds, including those provided by Oahuâs largest poultry farm as part of a routine program, birds from small or large farms countywide that appear to be ill and imported birds. All tests since 2022 have been negative. Cattle - Hawaii has just one farm on Hawaii Island that does not import cows from off-island. In the years since H5N1 was first detected in the U.S., no dairy cows have been imported into the state. All imported livestock cattle are inspected by an HDOA veterinarian, and no signs of the influenza have been found. Human influenza subtype monitoring - HSL conducts routine âsubtyping on specimensâ provided by commercial labs that were collected from people throughout the state who have tested positive for influenza. HSL has subtyped over 620 human specimens during this current flu season with no detection of H5N1. Wastewater surveillance - WastewaterSCAN, a CDC National Wastewater Surveillance System partner, has been continuously performing H5N1-specific testing on wastewater at the Sand Island Wastewater Treatment Plant from a few months ago and has reported no detection. Spectrum News Our Journalists Contact Careers Advertise With Us TERMS Your Privacy Rights California Consumer Privacy Rights California Consumer Limit the Use of My Sensitive Personal Information Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information/Opt-Out of Targeted Advertising Â© 2024, Charter Communications, all rights reserved.Bird flu: What are the human symptoms and how does it spread? | Fortune WellHomeLifeHealthMindFamilyAging WellHome PageSEARCHSectionsFORTUNE 500NewsEuropeAsiaTechAIFinancePersonal FinanceReal EstateCryptoLeadershipSuccessWellLifeHealthMindFamilyAging WellRecommendsCredit CardsBankingBest High-Yield Savings AccountsBest Savings AccountsBest CD RatesBest Money Market AccountsSavings CalculatorInsuranceMortgagesInvestingLoansHealthEducationTop Business SchoolsTop Information Technology and Data SchoolsTop Health SchoolsBusiness SolutionsVideoRankingsFORTUNE 500GLOBAL 500MOST POWERFUL WOMENGREAT PLACE TO WORK LISTSBEST MBA PROGRAMSMORE RANKINGSFortune Company ListAnalyticsNewslettersMagazineDecember 2023/January 2024October/November 2023August/September 2023June/July 2023April/May 2023February/March 2023Live MediaCEO InitiativeHealth·bird fluWhat are the symptoms of bird flu and how does it spread?BYLindsey LeakeAt least nine U.S. farm workers had tested positive for the H5N1 strain of avian influenza, or bird flu, as of July 14, 2024, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. All had come into close contact with infected cattle or poultry.Getty ImagesEarlier this month, Colorado Gov. Jared Polis declared a disaster emergency not for the wildfires common to the Centennial State this time of year, but for a bird flu outbreak at a commercial poultry facility in Weld County, north of Denver. Now, several workers at the egg farm who had been culling poultry in response to the spread of avian influenza have tested positive for the disease. Five people have been infected, according to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. As of Sunday, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) had confirmed four of those cases. None of the workers was hospitalized, Colorado officials said, noting their mild symptoms included conjunctivitis, or pink eye, and symptoms consistent with respiratory infection. Colorado was already ground zero for animal-to-human spread of H5N1, the current strain of bird flu circulating the globe. In 2022, a Colorado farm worker culling poultry tested positive. Until this month, CDC records show, no other poultry-to-human transmissions had been reported. However, since April 1, 2024, four workers on U.S. dairy farms have tested positive for bird flu after interacting with cattle: two in Michigan, one in Texas, and, most recently, one in Colorado. If the presumptive positive test from Colorado’s latest poultry outbreak is confirmed, 10 people in the U.S. will have contracted bird flu from cattle or poultry since 2022. The CDC maintains that the general public’s risk of contracting H5N1 is low. People who work closely with infected birds and other animals, though, remain at greater risk. Infected wild birds can spread the virus to poultry and other animals through feces, mucus, and saliva. Avian flu has so far impacted more than 99 million poultry in 48 states and more than 150 dairy cattle herds in 12 states. Modern industrial farming has crafted ideal conditions for disease spread, according to Edwin Michael, PhD, an epidemiologist at the University of South Florida College of Public Health. “Look at the density of animals in those farms—those are not natural settings,” Michael previously told Fortune. “So as soon as you get [an infection], these things will spread very quickly among farm animals.” Michael added, “We have to shed a light on how farming is done. That’s the trade-off, you want cheap meat and all the rest of it, but then you farm animals in this way and you’re opening the door up for other things.” How does bird flu spread to humans? The general public has a low risk of catching bird flu not only because they’re unlikely to come into direct contact with infected birds but also because the CDC hasn’t documented any person-to-person transmission. Testing by the Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Department of Agriculture has shown the nation’s commercial milk supply is safe, as pasteurization inactivates H5N1. Eggs and poultry are also safe to eat, so long as they are cooked to an internal temperature of 165 degrees, the CDC says. In April, the World Health Organization seconded the CDC’s assessment that the public was at minimal risk, citing a lack of evidence that the virus had acquired mutations that would facilitate its transmission among humans. The agency stressed that sporadic bird flu infections in mammals and humans is par for the course, and that further human cases wouldn’t be unexpected. This guidance has not yet been updated following the latest string of Colorado infections. Preventing widespread infection among farm workers is key to limiting opportunities for viral mutation, says Michael Osterholm, PhD, director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. “There’s no evidence yet at this point that this is an imminent risk to humans,” Osterholm told Fortune in May. “We’ve not seen it cross over to humans in a way that would support that it’s going to be the next pandemic virus. On the other hand, a reassortant event, or continued mutations, could occur tomorrow.” What are symptoms of bird flu in humans? Humans infected with bird flu display a wide range of symptoms, from pneumonia requiring hospitalization to no symptoms at all. The CDC lists these other possible signs of infection: Cough Eye redness Fatigue Fever or feeling feverish Headaches Muscle or body aches Runny or stuffy nose Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing Sore throat Less common symptoms include: Diarrhea Nausea Seizures Vomiting For more on the latest bird flu outbreak: Bird flu FAQ: Everything you need to know about the H5N1 outbreak that’s spread to dairy cows in 9 states Bird flu outbreak at Colorado farm as 5 workers reported positive: Experts warn of ‘turning point,’ call for urgent action Bird flu fragments are in pasteurized milk now, but the FDA—and many other government agencies—still considers it safe U.S. government will pay Moderna $176 million to develop a bird flu vaccine to stave off dairy cow epidemicSubscribe to Well Adjusted, our newsletter full of simple strategies to work smarter and live better, from the Fortune Well team. Sign up for free today.Latest in Health0 minutes agoHealth - CancerWorking out at these times of day could reduce your risk of colorectal cancer by 11%, new study saysBYLindsey Leake0 minutes agoHealth - chemicalsEndocrine-disrupting chemicals are everywhere. Here’s how to reduce your exposureBYAni Freedman0 minutes agoHealth - bird fluBird flu begins its human spread, as health officials scramble to safeguard people and livestockBYCarolyn Barber0 minutes agoMind - mental health8 surprising, subtle signs you have high-functioning anxietyBYAlexa Mikhail0 minutes agoHealth - Donald TrumpRFK Jr. wants Trump to remove fluoride from water over health claims. Here’s what science says.BYBeth Greenfield0 minutes agoHealth - MedicaidTrump’s White House return poised to tangle health care safety netBYStephanie Armour and KFF Health NewsMost Popular0 minutes agoHealth5 symptoms women over 40 should always take seriouslyBYJessica Firger0 minutes agoHealthYou might be overdoing it on protein and not getting enough of another vital nutrient, dietitians sayBYAni Freedman0 minutes agoHealthRFK Jr. wants Trump to remove fluoride from water over health claims. Here’s what science says.BYBeth Greenfield0 minutes agoHealthBird flu begins its human spread, as health officials scramble to safeguard people and livestockBYCarolyn Barber0 minutes agoAging WellShopping for a 2025 Medigap policy? There may be some good news for youBYRichard Eisenberg0 minutes agoMindMillions were devastated by the election results, and so were their therapists. Here’s how they pushed through togetherBYBeth GreenfieldRankings100 Best CompaniesFortune 500Global 500Fortune 500 EuropeMost Powerful WomenFuture 50World’s Most Admired CompaniesSee All RankingsSectionsFinanceLeadershipSuccessTechAsiaEuropeEnvironmentFortune CryptoHealthWellRetailLifestylePoliticsNewslettersMagazineFeaturesCommentaryMPWCEO InitiativeConferencesPersonal FinanceRecommendsCustomer SupportFrequently Asked QuestionsCustomer Service PortalPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseSingle Issues for PurchaseInternational PrintCommercial ServicesFortune Brand StudioFortune AnalyticsFortune ConferencesAdvertisingBusiness DevelopmentAbout UsAbout UsEditorial CalendarPress CenterWork at FortuneDiversity and InclusionTerms and ConditionsSite Map© 2024 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy | CA Notice at Collection and Privacy Notice | Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information FORTUNE is a trademark of Fortune Media IP Limited, registered in the U.S. and other countries. FORTUNE may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.Figure 6 - Proposal for a Global Classification and Nomenclature System for A/H9 Influenza Viruses - Volume 30, Number 8—August 2024 - Emerging Infectious Diseases journal - CDC Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People A-Z Index × Submit A-Z Index × Submit A-Z Index Search Dropdown × Submit Emerging Infectious Disease journal ISSN: 1080-6059 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate Volume 30, Number 8—August 2024 Online Report Proposal for a Global Classification and Nomenclature System for A/H9 Influenza Viruses Alice Fusaro1, Juan Pu1, Yong Zhou1, Lu Lu, Luca Tassoni, Yu Lan, Tommy Tsan-Yuk Lam, Zoe Song, Justin Bahl, Jiani Chen, George F. Gao, Isabella Monne, Jinhua Liu , and The International H9 Evolution Consortium2 Author affiliations: Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Legnaro, Italy (A. Fusaro, L. Tassoni, I. Monne); China Agricultural University, Beijing, China (J. Pu, Y. Zhou, J. Liu); University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK (L. Lu); Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing (Y. Lan); The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (T.T.-Y. Lam, Z. Song); University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA (J. Bahl, J. Chen); Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing (G.F. Gao) Main Article Figure 6 Figure 6. Geographic distribution of each lineage and clade for A/H9 influenza viruses as part of a proposed global classification and nomenclature system for A/H9 influenza viruses. The heat map displays the number of sequences for each lineage and clade per country. Countries were ordered by their macro-region (upper panels). Each country displaying >1 sequence was colored on the map in green (Y lineage), blue (G lineage), or red (B lineage) (bottom panels). Main Article 1These first authors contributed equally to this article.2Members of The International H9 Evolution Consortium are listed at the end of this article. Page created: July 12, 2024 Page updated: July 22, 2024 Page reviewed: July 22, 2024 The conclusions, findings, and opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the official position of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions. Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by any of the groups named above. home4EID JournalAbout the JournalexpandGeneral InformationexpandBackground and GoalsEditorsEditorial BoardStaffContactArticlesexpandNovember 2024Infectious Diseases and Carceral Health SupplementEarly ReleasePast IssuesexpandAugust 2024expandProposal for a Global Classification and Nomenclature System for A/H9 Influenza VirusesexpandFigure 1Figure 2Figure 3Figure 4Figure 5Figure 6Figure 7Appendix 1Appendix 2Appendix 3Medscape CMEICEIDSearchexpandAdvanced Article SearchArticles by Country SearchSpotlight TopicsexpandAntimicrobial Resistance SpotlightCoronavirus SpotlightEbola SpotlightEtymologiaFood Safety SpotlightFungal DiseasesHIV/AIDS SpotlightInfluenza SpotlightLyme Disease SpotlightMalaria SpotlightMERS SpotlightMpox SpotlightPneumonia SpotlightRabies SpotlightTicks SpotlightTuberculosis/MycobacteriaZika SpotlightArticle Type SearchEID on PubMed CentralSubscribeAuthor Resource CenterPeer ReviewersPodcastsexpandSearchSocial Media Press & Media Information About CDC Contact Us 800-232-4636 Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat CONTACT CDC Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Email Us ABOUT CDC About CDC Jobs Funding POLICIES Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA OIG Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications CONNECT WITH US Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat Email LANGUAGES Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA Nondiscrimination OIG Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications USA.gov file_externalU.S. bird flu response builds on lessons from COVID | News | Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Menu Close Menu Skip to content Information For: Prospective Students Current Students Alumni Faculty & Staff Friends & Supporters Search for: Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Email People Departments Calendar Careers my.harvard Giving About Faculty & Research Admissions & Aid Academics Executive/Continuing Ed News News > News > Featured News Stories > 2024 > U.S. bird flu response builds on lessons learned from COVID News Menu Search for: News Home Press Releases 2023 Releases 2022 Releases 2021 Releases 2020 Releases 2019 Releases 2018 Releases 2017 Releases 2016 Releases 2015 Releases 2014 Releases 2013 Releases 2012 Releases 2011 Releases Search the press releases archive Features In the News Multimedia 2022 Multimedia 2021 Multimedia 2020 Multimedia 2019 Multimedia 2018 Multimedia 2017 Multimedia 2016 Multimedia 2015 Multimedia 2014 Multimedia 2013 Multimedia 2012 Multimedia HPH Magazine Faculty Stories Faculty News – Summer 2024 Faculty News – Winter 2024 Student Stories Student News, Notes, and Accolades Alumni Stories Alumni News – Summer 2024 Alumni News – Winter 2024 Explore Research by Topic Office of Communications Make a Gift U.S. bird flu response builds on lessons learned from COVID CDC Director Mandy Cohen explains how country is tackling the H5N1 outbreak July 16, 2024—Avian influenza, or bird flu, has been in the headlines for months now, percolating at a low level but sparking concerns about the risk of broader contagion. In the U.S., bird flu has infected dairy cows in at least a dozen states, as well as wild birds and commercial poultry. So far, a small number of dairy and poultry workers have tested positive for the variant of the virus that is circulating in North America, known as H5N1. All cases have been mild. Mandy Cohen, MPH ’04, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, explained how the U.S. government is responding: The current risk to the American people in terms of avian flu is low. But we are taking this very seriously. We have been doing decades of work to understand this virus and prepare. So, it’s a very different situation when contrasted with COVID-19, which was caused by a novel virus. We have many ways in which we’re tracking this virus, everything from a wastewater [surveillance] system—which we built for COVID and are now using for avian flu—to the ability to see into 90% of our emergency rooms. We get real-time anonymized data to track folks, we get de-identifed laboratory data, and we have an extensive genomic sequencing program, so we are able to track changes in the virus. Mandy Cohen We have not seen a human-to-human transmission of this virus, and that is good news. But we’ve learned through COVID how these viruses love to change, so we need to stay ahead of it. [We want to] give this virus less opportunity to change, and we want to make sure that we notice if there are any changes so that we can appropriately respond. We have tests that are widely available for H5N1 in all our public health labs across the country, with more than a million tests available, and more on the way as we scale up. We have a treatment, Tamiflu, that is widely available through everyday pharmacies, but also in our stockpile. And we have vaccine candidates that we are continually evaluating and can scale up if we need it. We continue to be able to say that the threat is low, but we are taking it very, very seriously. —As told to Todd Datz Photo: iStock/Sabrina Gordon Share this:FacebookTwitterLinkedInReddit Newsletters Get the latest Harvard Chan School news delivered to your inbox. Subscribe here Related Articles emergency preparedness infectious diseases More testing, sequencing key to quickly detecting new infectious disease variants Students analyze how U.S. could support allies during health emergencies Emergency preparedness experts preach the power of communication More on this topic Artificial intelligence’s potential health benefits, risks discussed at conference More testing, sequencing key to quickly detecting new infectious disease variants CDC's Mandy Cohen on COVID lessons and restoring trust in public health More on this topic Explore HSPH research by topic Information For: Prospective Students Current Students Alumni Faculty & Staff Friends & Supporters About Quick Facts Renaming the School Office of the Dean Location and Facilities Administrative Offices Contact Us Faculty and Research Faculty and Researcher Directory Academic Departments, Divisions and Centers International Research Postdoctoral Research Fellows Office of Faculty Affairs Faculty Searches Office of Diversity and Inclusion Admissions & Aid Why Harvard Chan Degree Programs Non-Degree Programs Financial Aid Student Experience Career Advancement Apply Academics Academic Departments Divisions Research Centers Flagship Initiatives International Research Research Administration and Support Degree Programs Fellowships and Residencies Summer Programs Continuing Professional Education Interdisciplinary Concentrations Academic Calendar Harvard Chan Viewbook Executive/Continuing Ed Program Offerings Custom Programs Request Information News and Resources About ECPE Contact News Featured News Press Releases Student Stories In the News Newsletters HPH Magazine Why Public Health? Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115 Twitter Facebook YouTube LinkedIn Instagram iTunes Harvard Chan Home Contact us Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Nondiscrimination Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility Digital Accessibility Copyright © 2024 The President and Fellows of Harvard College Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) WebsiteNanoparticles boost flu vaccine effectiveness - Futurity Search for: Search for: Futurity is your source of research news from leading universities. About Futurity Universities Science Health Culture Environment Videos Interviews Slideshows Audio Science Health Culture Environment Research news from top universities Subscribe Science Health Culture Environment 1721042750 Nanoparticles boost flu vaccine effectiveness July 15th, 2024 Posted by LaTina Emerson-Georgia State (Credit: Getty Images) Share this Article Facebook Twitter Reddit Email You are free to share this article under the Attribution 4.0 International license. Tags influenzapandemicsvaccinesviruses University Georgia State University A new study offers valuable insights into tailoring immunization strategies to optimize influenza vaccine effectiveness. To offer cross-protection against diverse influenza virus variants, nanoparticle vaccines can produce pivotal cellular and mucosal immune responses that enhance vaccine efficacy and broaden protection, according to the study in Nature Communications. To alleviate the significant public health burden of influenza epidemics and occasional pandemics, it’s essential to enhance influenza vaccine cross-protection, researchers say. While the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends annual influenza vaccination, current seasonal influenza vaccines typically provide strain-specific and short-lived immunity. Seasonal influenza vaccines offer limited cross-protection against antigenically diverse virus variants and provide no defense against sporadic influenza pandemics, the authors explain. “Developing effective influenza vaccines or vaccination strategies that can confer cross-protection against variant influenza viruses is a high priority to mitigate the public health consequences of influenza,” says first author Chunhong Dong, a postdoctoral fellow in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences at Georgia State. In the study, the researchers investigated the effects of immunization strategies on the generation of cross-protective immune responses in female mice using mRNA lipid nanoparticle (LNP) and protein-based polyethyleneimine-HA/CpG (PHC) nanoparticle vaccines targeting influenza hemagglutinin. The mice were immunized with either intramuscular mRNA LNP or intranasal PHC vaccines in a typical prime-plus-boost regimen. A variety of sequential immunization strategies were included in this study for comparison. “We demonstrated that cellular and mucosal immune responses are pivotal correlates of cross-protection against influenza,” says Baozhong Wang, senior author of the study and a professor in the Institute for Biomedical Sciences. “Notably, intranasal PHC immunization outperforms its intramuscular counterpart in inducing mucosal immunity and conferring cross-protection. Sequential mRNA LNP prime and intranasal PHC boost demonstrated optimal cross-protection against antigenically drifted and shifted influenza strains.” The study highlights the importance of immunization orders and indicates that in a sequential immunization, an mRNA vaccine priming plays an important role in steering the Th1/Th2 immune responses. Also, the intranasal PHC boost is crucial to the induction of mucosal immunity, Wang says. The National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases funded the work. Source: Georgia State Original Study DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-50087-5 Related Extreme pandemics aren’t as rare as we thought Nasal spray flu vaccine may protect against a variety of strains How mRNA and adenovirus vaccines work Stay Connected. Subscribe to our Newsletter. Add your information below to receive daily updates. Sign Up Load More First Name Last Name Email* EmailThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Research news from top universities ©2024. Futurity. All rights reserved.Tests confirm H5N1 in Oklahoma dairy herd; 13 states now affected | CIDRAP Skip to main content University of Minnesota Main navigationMain content University of Minnesotahttp:/win-cities.umn.edu/612-625-5000 Go to the U of M home page Main navigation News Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Podcasts Newsletters About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us About Search CLOSE Search Support Menu Tests confirm H5N1 in Oklahoma dairy herd; 13 states now affected Lisa Schnirring Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) Arisara1978 / iStock Share Copied to clipboard The Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food, and Forestry recently confirmed the state's first highly pathogenic avian flu outbreak in a dairy herd, bringing the number of affected states to 13.In research developments, a team from the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) reported results from H5N1 challenge studies in heifers and lactating cows, which showed that the virus can spread between cattle by both respiratory and mammary routes.Oklahoma samples collected in AprilIn a July 12 statement, Oklahoma officials said the sample was collected by the dairy farm in April and was recently submitted to the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) for testing. It added that the herd has recovered and the farm has not reported any other cases.Oklahoma State Veterinarian Rod Hall, DVM, said, "Our team has been in constant communication with Oklahoma dairies asking them to heighten their biosecurity practices. PPE [personal protective equipment] has also been made available to Oklahoma dairy farmers."The statement did not provide information on the long delay between sample collection and publication of the test results.In an update today, the USDA APHIS said 157 H5N1 outbreaks have now been confirmed in 13 states, which includes the Oklahoma herd plus additional new detections in Colorado and Idaho.Infection routes in dairy herdsFor the challenge study, USDA researchers in a biosafety-level 3 agriculture facility used a B3.13 genotype H5N1 virus to inoculate two nonpregnant but lactating Holstein cows by the intramammary route and five 1-year-old Holstein heifer calves by the aerosol route. Four of the calves received the virus, and one received buffered saline. The scientists reported their findings on the preprint server bioRxiv. They have not been peer-reviewed. The lactating cows infected by the intramammary route had significant milk disease that mirrored what farmers and scientists have previously reported. High viral RNA levels were detected in milk, and researchers isolated the virus, found lesions in mammary tissue, and saw evidence of seroconversion.Virus persistence was still seen in mammary glands and milk for up to 24 days after inoculation.Meanwhile, heifers who were infected through the airborne route had mild disease. Scientists found replicating virus in the airways and lungs, suggesting that asymptomatic cows are able to spread the virus to herd mates. The team also found evidence of seroconversion. "Although respiratory infection was limited in the 4 heifers, the detection of viable virus in 2 out of 4 represents a mode of infection and transmission that, when applied to an animal facility that commonly holds hundreds of animals, implies there is a role for the respiratory route," they wrote. Related news Previous Next Studies describe deadly avian flu outbreaks among seals, terns Stephanie Soucheray Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen Lisa Schnirring CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Lisa Schnirring California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases Lisa Schnirring Utah reports avian flu in dairy cows as USDA announces plan for bulk milk sampling Lisa Schnirring USDA announces first H5N1 avian flu detection in US pigs Lisa Schnirring H5N1 avian flu isolate from dairy worker is transmissible, lethal in animals Lisa Schnirring This week's top reads Recent COVID-19 vaccination tied to lower risk of long COVID Overall, the risk of developing 28 out of 36 long-COVID symptoms lessened when vaccines were effective. Stephanie Soucheray California, Washington report more suspected H5 avian flu cases In related developments, the USDA reported more dairy cow and poultry outbreaks, as Los Angeles Country announced its first H5 wastewater detection. Lisa Schnirring Scientists track emergence of novel H5N1 flu reassortant in Cambodia Since a spillover in October 2023 the novel reassortment has replaced the older clade in Cambodia's poultry. Lisa Schnirring MIS-C much more common in kids not vaccinated against COVID-19, data reveal Among 12- to 17-year-olds, 90% of those with MIS-C were unvaccinated. Stephanie Soucheray CDC expands avian flu testing for farm workers, notes 7% infection rate in those exposed to infected cows The CDC now recommends testing and prophylactic Tamiflu use in asymptomatic workers exposed to sick animals. Lisa Schnirring Four cases of sexually transmitted fungal infection reported in New York The infections were caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes type VII (TMVII), a sexually transmitted fungus that causes ringworm. Chris Dall Canada probes suspected avian flu infection in hospitalized teen The presumed positive infection comes amid a rise in poultry outbreaks in BC and US western states, likely triggered by wild bird migration. Lisa Schnirring Surveys reveal Americans' persistent mistrust in COVID vaccine science The greatest levels of trust were seen among men, those with university degrees and high median outcomes, and those who had lost someone to COVID-19. Mary Van Beusekom Trial shows safety of getting COVID, flu vaccines at same time Over half of participants (57%) reported a history of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Stephanie Soucheray Cases top 50,000 in Africa's mpox outbreak In other outbreak developments, medical groups announce a vaccine allocation plan and a vaccine trial to begin in pregnant women and in children younger than 2. Lisa Schnirring Our underwriters Unrestricted financial support provided by Principal Underwriter Leading Underwriter Major Underwriter Supporting Underwriter Become an Underwriter Help make CIDRAP's vital work possible Support Us Home Editorial policy Search news Contact Us CIDRAP - Center for Infectious Disease Research & Policy Research and Innovation Office, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN Email us © 2024 Regents of the University of Minnesota. All rights Reserved. The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer Research and Innovation Office | Contact U of M | Privacy Policy Newsletter subscribe Get CIDRAP updates Choose newsletters Select all Daily Headlines Antimicrobial Stewardship Newsletter Chronic Wasting Disease Newsletter Flu Vaccine Roadmap Newsletter Resilient Drug Supply Newsletter Email Email Format html text News Topics & Projects Antimicrobial Resistance COVID-19 Chronic Wasting Disease Influenza Mpox All Topics A-Z Resilient Drug Supply Influenza Vaccines Roadmap CIDRAP Leadership Forum Roadmap Development Coronavirus Vaccines Roadmap . . Podcasts Antimicrobial Stewardship Chronic Wasting Disease Osterholm Update Newsletters About About CIDRAP CIDRAP in the News Our Staff Our Director Osterholm in the Press Shop Merchandise Contact Us DonateUpdate on avian influenza in Australia | Doherty Website Search Please do not fill-in this field About Our Work Services & Facilities People Education Careers News & Events Support COVID-19 Research Searchss A joint venture between The University of Melbourne and The Royal Melbourne Hospital Search About Overview Laureate Professor Peter Doherty Governance Reports & Publications Brochures Venue Hire Support our work Advocacy Contact Us Our Work Institute Themes Immunology Viral Infectious Diseases HIV Hepatitis Influenza Emerging Infections COVID-19 Antimicrobial Resistance Bacterial and Parasitic Infections Malaria Tuberculosis Buruli Ulcer Cross-Cutting Disciplines Discovery Research Public Health Clinical and health systems research Global Health Education & Professional Development Indigenous Health Computational Science and Genomics Services & Facilities Services Facilities People Education Study at the Doherty Institute Research Projects PhD Clinician Graduate Research Training Meet our graduate researchers Prospective Student Information Session Contacts Careers News & Events News Events Setting it Straight Podcast: Infection and Immunity - Evidence Explained Publications Support COVID-19 Research News 16 Jul 2024 Update on avian influenza in Australia The highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) strain H5N1 is causing an animal pandemic, or panzootic, around the world, with millions of wild birds, mammals, poultry and livestock now affected. Australia, on the other hand, is experiencing something different. University of Melbourne’s Dr Michelle Wille, Senior Research Fellow at the Centre for Pathogen Genomics and an honorary position at WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza at the Doherty Institute, explains. At the time of writing, various HPAI strains (H7N3, H7N9, H7N8) have been reported in eight poultry farms in Victoria, including Terang and Golden Plains Shire, in two in the Greater Sydney Basin (NSW) and in one in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). The seven premises in the Golden Plains Shire are infected with the same strain (H7N3). While the property near Terang was epidemiologically linked, it was infected with a different strain (H7N9). A third strain (H7N8) first detected in NSW, was also found in the ACT. All of this has occurred amid growing concerns about the arrival of an overseas strain of HPAI H5N1, which is causing a global panzootic and requires a different risk and response strategy compared to our current HPAI H7 outbreaks. Oceania is the only part of the world remaining free from HPAI H5N1. HPAI vs LPAI, H7 vs N5 – what does it all mean? There are many avian influenza viruses—some common, some rare, some lethal, some benign, some exclusively in seagulls, and some found in a huge diversity of birds. To address this, we classify these viruses by features of the virus (called subtypes) and disease severity (pathogenicity). The most common viruses are called “low pathogenicity avian influenza” (LPAI) because they do not cause disease in wild birds. They are found in wild birds globally, including Australia, and comprise 16 HA and nine NA subtypes. The different subtypes refer to the diversity of proteins on the surface of the virus called the HA and the NA, and can mix and match (e.g. H7N9, H7N8). Within the H5 subtype, we may also refer to genetic clades (such as clade 2.3.4.4b), and these genetic clades are somewhat similar to SARS-CoV-2 variants. In contrast, high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) viruses which are lethal and make wild birds and poultry very sick. These HPAI viruses evolve when subtypes H5 and H7 infect poultry and undergo genetic changes, making the viruses more lethal. This is exactly what has occurred in Australia – l LPAI H7 viruses, which do not cause disease, jumped from wild birds to poultry, where they evolved into HPAI and caused outbreaks. This is not the first time an HPAI outbreak has happened in Australia. Unlike the HPAI H5N1 which is not present in Australia, Australia has faced a number of HPAI H7 outbreaks, the most recent being HPAI H7N7 outbreak in Victoria in 2020. To control the outbreak, movement and control zones have been set up, in both Victoria and NSW. Poultry must now be kept indoors in certain areas to prevent another virus jump event. Farms that have tested positive are being depopulated to stop virus spread and further evolution, and importantly, to prevent the HPAI virus entering wild bird populations. A similar process occurred in 1996 when HPAI H5N1 jumped from wild birds into poultry and then evolved in chickens. Unfortunately, this HPAI H5N1 strain was never controlled and has been spreading in poultry for decades. It developed mutations that allow for wild birds to carry it more effectively which resulted in massive global spread since 2021. HPAI H5N1 has caused the death of hundreds of millions of poultry, millions of wild birds, tens of thousands of mammals, as well as humans, making it a virus of serious concern. From low pathogenicity to high pathogenicity (Graph by Dr Michelle Wille from the Doherty Institute) Why now? The occurrence of the HPAI H7 outbreaks in Australia this year is likely not a coincidence. Previous research has shown a link between rainfall in the Murray Darling Basin and poultry outbreaks in the southeastern states. It’s not that rainfall directly has an impact on poultry, but rather that it affects what is happening in wild waterbirds. Following multiple La Niña years in a row with high rainfall, waterbird populations have surged resulting in a high number juvenile birds without antibodies against avian influenza viruses. As the region transitions into a period of less rainfall, the waterbirds begin to concentrate in permanent wetlands, leading to increased contact rates and higher LPAI prevalence among wild birds. With lots of LPAI in wild birds, the risk of spread to poultry increases. So, we hypothesise that, at present, there is likely to be a lot of LPAI H7, including many genotypes within H7, in the waterbirds of the Murray Darling Basin. As these birds have come into contact with poultry, there has been a virus jump from wild birds to free-range poultry on at least three occasions, resulting in three distinct viruses in poultry. To verify our hypothesis, we are out in the field catching ducks to understand what is happening in the wild bird population. In addition to resolving this hypothesis, this work is contributing samples and testing results to local authorities to understand the context of the spillovers and confirm that HPAI H7 from poultry has not jumped back into wild birds. What should I do? If you see sick or dead wild birds or poultry, including backyard chooks, it is imperative that you call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline—1800 675 888—regardless of which state you are located in. If you have backyard poultry, please check the jurisdictional websites to see if you are in the restricted or controlled areas and keep your chickens inside if you are. The latest updates can be found on the Agriculture Victoria, ACT and NSW government websites. News Archive 2024 January February March April May June July August September October November 2023 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2022 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2021 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2020 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2019 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2018 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2017 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2016 January February March April May June July August September October November December 2015 June July August October November December KEEP INFORMED Facebook Twitter Instagram Subscribe for the latest news, events and research For any media enquiries, please contact: Communications Team P: +61383441911 E: doherty-media@unimelb.edu.au Contact Us 792 Elizabeth Street Melbourne, 3000 Get Directions doherty-reception@unimelb.edu.au +61 3 9035 3555 Contact Us Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Keep informed Subscribe for the latest news, events and research First name Last name Email Subscribe We acknowledge the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation as the traditional custodians of the land where our Institute stands. We are committed to collaboration with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to reduce the unacceptable burden of infectious disease. We are committed to training the next generation of exceptional Indigenous leaders in infection and immunity. Copyright The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity Privacy Policy | Intranet | Site by LemonadeAvian influenza outbreak largest animal disease outbreak ever in U.S. - Talk Business & Politics Business AllAgricultureEducationEnergyFinanceHealthcareManufacturingRetailStartups / TechnologyTourism / Heritage Home builder to locate $42 million factory in Conway, will add 250 jobs UA Little Rock names Cavanaugh to lead School of Criminal Justice Museum of Discovery names interim CEO Walmart adds same-day delivery on prescriptions in Arkansas, other states Agriculture Education Energy Finance Healthcare Manufacturing Startups / Technology Retail Tourism / Heritage Politics Arkansas farm income down Arkansas Global Connect receives recognition for responsible recruitment practices Arkansas Supreme Court rules medical marijuana votes won’t be counted Jonesboro mayoral candidates square off at multiple forums in October Vo-tech opened doors for me; let’s open doors for more Arkansans with Issue 1 Regions AllCentral ArkansasFort SmithNortheast ArkansasNorthwest Arkansas Home builder to locate $42 million factory in Conway, will add 250 jobs UA Little Rock names Cavanaugh to lead School of Criminal Justice Museum of Discovery names interim CEO Walmart adds same-day delivery on prescriptions in Arkansas, other states Central Arkansas Fort Smith Northeast Arkansas Northwest Arkansas Video / Podcasts Arkansas Global Connect receives recognition for responsible recruitment practices UAMS bringing ‘Dreamland’ author Sam Quinones to Arkansas for conversation on substance abuse UCA President discusses changes coming to higher ed, ‘enrollment cliff’ Poll: Arkansas ballot issue support ranges Poll: President Biden job approval 38%, Gov. Sanders at 50% in Arkansas Special Sections AllArkansas Transportation ReportCompass ReportSpotlight on Small BusinessState of the State ReportThe Supply SideTourism TickerTusk to Tail The Supply Side: Fire Dept. Coffee celebrates 1 successful year in Walmart The Supply Side: ’Ugly’ fruit company owners get Walmart’s attention Arkansas Tourism Ticker: Tourism tax revenue sets new record in June The Supply Side: High Impact Analytics grows staff, revenue, clients Arkansas Transportation Report Compass Report Tusk to Tail The Supply Side Tourism Ticker Advertise Contact Subscribe Avian influenza outbreak largest animal disease outbreak ever in U.S. AgricultureLatest NewsNortheast ArkansasTalk Politics by George Jared ([email protected]) July 15, 2024 9:43 am 642 views Tags:avian influenza FacebookXLinkedInThreadsPrintEmail The avian influenza (HPAI) outbreak that began in February 2022 is now the nation’s largest animal disease event ever, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). It has spread from poultry to cattle and has infected humans. The disease has spread to nearly every state. The USDA reported that 97.26 million birds in commercial and backyard flocks, as well as 137 dairy cattle herds, have been affected since the outbreak began. In a June 2024 technical report, the CDC reported the virus has also infected three farm workers in Texas and Michigan this year. Since December 2023, the number of states where HPAI has been detected has risen from 27 to 48. Since May 24, 2024, 6.41 million birds have been affected, according to the USDA. Brook Duer, staff attorney at Penn State Center for Agricultural and Shale Law, said HPAI remains as transmissible as it was when it was first detected in 2015. “We are in uncharted territory with HPAI in poultry – it is by far the largest animal disease event in U.S. history,” Duer said. “HPAI may already be a permanent backdrop to poultry and egg production.” The foundational statutes, regulations, manuals and procedures that give USDA its authority will be examined through the lens of HPAI outbreaks in poultry and cattle during the National Agricultural Law Center’s next webinar, “HPAI in Poultry and Cattle: How Can We Miss You If You Won’t Go Away?” The webinar will be presented by Duer. The spillover to dairy cattle has brought more insights and questions. Each host species’ unique response to the virus is vastly different and the virus can mutate quickly, Duer said. “With dairy cattle, the disease can go nearly undetected through traditional observation of symptoms. This allows it to reach a point in the food production supply chain where pasteurization becomes the primary tool. That might be seen as uncomfortably close to the consumer,” Duer said. “Understanding how USDA-APHIS’ response has progressed to date, and why, will allow producers to better anticipate what research still needs to be done to get the answers producers want.” The webinar will be held Wednesday (July 17). A death in Mexico that was initially linked to HPAI has since been reinvestigated and attributed to other causes, according to the World Health Organization. FacebookXLinkedInThreadsPrintEmail Related Previous post Riff Raff: Water, money, and lawyers Next post Evans named president of Arvest’s Benton County market Read the NWABJ Digital IssueSubscribe Now Read the NEA Digital IssueSubscribe Now Talk Business & Politics by email Arkansas headlines delivered to you on demand Email address Statewide Newsletter Northeast Arkansas Newsletter Fort Smith Newsletter Northwest Arkansas Newsletter Submit Follow TBP Everywhere Search Talk Business & Politics Search for: Talk Business & Politics is a news website that covers business, politics and culture in Arkansas. You can also sign up for daily e-mail news delivered every morning to your inbox. Recent Business NewsWalmart adds same-day delivery on prescriptions in Arkansas, other statesby Talk Business & Politics staffOctober 22, 2024Heartland Forward pushing progress on AI, telehealth, career readinessby Roby BrockOctober 22, 2024 Copyright Talk Business & Politics © 2023. All Rights Reserved Business Agriculture Education Energy Finance Healthcare Manufacturing Startups / Technology Retail Tourism / Heritage Politics Regions Central Arkansas Fort Smith Northeast Arkansas Northwest Arkansas Video / Podcasts Special Sections Arkansas Transportation Report Compass Report Tusk to Tail The Supply Side Tourism Ticker Advertise Contact SubscribeFlu Vaccine Protects Nonhuman Primates Against Avian H5N1 genprowebdirectory Facebook Linkedin RSS Twitter Youtube GEN Edge Featured News Multimedia News Insights Topics Artificial Intelligence Bioprocessing Cancer Drug Discovery Genome Editing Infectious Diseases OMICs Translational Medicine Magazine Browse Issues Subscribe Multimedia Summits Webinars GEN Live Learning Labs Podcasts Resources A-Lists eBooks/Perspectives Tutorials Peer-Reviewed Journals GEN Biotechnology Re:Gen Open New Products Conference Calendar Subscribe Get GEN Magazine Get GEN eNewsletters Search Facebook Linkedin RSS Twitter Youtube Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Privacy Policy Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. GEN – Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology News GEN Edge Featured News Multimedia News Insights Topics Artificial Intelligence Bioprocessing Cancer Drug Discovery Genome Editing Infectious Diseases OMICs Translational Medicine Magazine Browse Issues Subscribe Multimedia Summits Webinars GEN Live Learning Labs Podcasts Resources A-Lists eBooks/Perspectives Tutorials Peer-Reviewed Journals GEN Biotechnology Re:Gen Open New Products Conference Calendar Subscribe Get GEN Magazine Get GEN eNewsletters Home Topics Infectious Diseases Flu Vaccine Protects Nonhuman Primates Against Avian H5N1 Credit: Kateryna Kon/Science Photo Library/Getty Images Flu Vaccine Protects Nonhuman Primates Against Avian H5N1 July 19, 2024 Credit: Kateryna Kon/Science Photo Library/Getty Images New research led by Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU) has revealed a promising approach to developing a universal influenza vaccine—a “one and done” vaccine—that confers lifetime immunity against an evolving virus. The researchers reported that the cytomegalovirus (CMV)-vectored vaccine generated a robust immune response in Mauritian cynomolgus macaques (MCM) that were exposed to the avian H5N1 influenza virus. However, the new vaccine wasn’t based on the contemporary H5N1 virus. Instead, it expressed conserved antigens from the influenza virus of 1918 that killed millions of people worldwide, and was designed to induce a specific T-cell response. The results confirmed that six of 11 nonhuman primates inoculated against the 1918 flu virus antigens survived exposure to the H5N1 strain, one of the deadliest viruses in the world today. In contrast, a control group of six unvaccinated primates exposed to the H5N1 virus succumbed to the infection. “It’s exciting because in most cases, this kind of basic science research advances the science very gradually; in 20 years, it might become something,” said research lead Jonah Sacha, PhD, professor and chief of the division of pathobiology at OHSU’s Oregon National Primate Research Center. “This could actually become a vaccine in five years or less,” Sacha said. He believes the platform “absolutely” could be useful against other mutating viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. “It’s a very viable approach,” he said. “For viruses of pandemic potential, it’s critical to have something like this. We set out to test influenza, but we don’t know what’s going to come next.” Sacha and colleagues reported their study findings in Nature Communications, in a paper titled, “Cytomegalovirus vaccine vector-induced effector memory CD4+ T cells protect cynomolgus macaques from lethal aerosolized heterologous avian influenza challenge.” The world remains at risk of another influenza pandemic, the authors wrote. “The four influenza pandemics of the past 100 years killed tens of millions of people, yet a universal influenza vaccine capable of protecting against future pandemic influenza viruses still does not exist.” Of particular concern are highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses such as H5N1, which has a fatality rate of 52% in humans, the investigators noted. “… new vaccine approaches capable of protecting against all influenza strains, and particularly against HPAI with pandemic potential, are urgently needed.” Commented co-corresponding author Douglas Reed, PhD, associate professor of immunology at the University of Pittsburgh Center for Vaccine Research, “Should a deadly virus such as H5N1 infect a human and ignite a pandemic, we need to quickly validate and deploy a new vaccine.” The researchers’ newly reported approach harnesses a vaccine platform previously developed by scientists at OHSU to fight HIV and tuberculosis, and is already being used in a clinical trial against HIV. The method involves inserting small pieces of target pathogens into the common herpes virus cytomegalovirus, or CMV, which infects most people in their lifetimes and typically produces mild or no symptoms. The virus acts as a vector specifically designed to induce an immune response from the body’s own T cells. This approach differs from common vaccines—including the existing flu vaccines—which are designed to induce an antibody response that targets the most recent evolution of the virus that is distinguished by the arrangement of proteins covering the exterior surface. “Current antibody-mediated influenza vaccines are strain-specific due to targeting of the highly variable hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) glycoproteins,” the team continued. Jonah Sacha, PhD, senior co-author of a study published in Nature Communications, said the research could lead to a universal influenza vaccine within five years. [OHSU/Christine Torres Hicks]“The problem with influenza is that it’s not just one virus,” Sacha said. “Like the SARS-CoV-2 virus, it’s always evolving the next variant and we’re always left to chase where the virus was, not where it’s going to be.” The spike proteins on the virus exterior surface evolve to elude antibodies. In the case of flu, vaccines are updated regularly using a best estimate of the next evolution of the virus. Sometimes it’s accurate, sometimes less so. “… given the continual sequence evolution of HA and NA through antigenic drift and ability of the segmented virus to recombine two or more different strains through antigenic shift, seasonal influenza vaccine effectiveness ranges from 30% to 60% depending on matching of the vaccine sequence to influenza viruses subsequently circulating that year,” the investigators stated. In contrast, effector memory T cells (TEM cells) in the lung target the internal structural proteins of the virus, rather than its continually mutating outer envelope. This internal structure doesn’t change much over time—presenting a stationary target for T cells to search out and destroy any cells infected by an old or newly evolved influenza virus. To test their T cell theory, the researchers designed a cynomolgus CMV (cyCMV)-based vaccine using the 1918 influenza virus as a template. The vaccines expressed H1N1 1918 influenza M1, NP, and PB1 antigens (CyCMV/Flu). They exposed CyCMV/flu-vaccinated nonhuman primates to small particle aerosols containing the avian H5N1 influenza virus—a severe virus that is currently circulating among dairy cows in the United States. The team found that, remarkably, six of the 11 vaccinated primates survived the exposure, despite the century-long period of virus evolution. The authors further noted, “Overall, we demonstrate that CyCMV vaccine vector-induced, influenza-specific CD4+ TEM protect MCM from an otherwise lethal HPAI infection … Survival correlates with the magnitude of lung-resident influenza-specific CD4 + T cells prior to challenge.” Sacha added, “It worked because the interior protein of the virus was so well preserved. So much so, that even after almost 100 years of evolution, the virus can’t change those critically important parts of itself.” The scientists noted that while it’s likely that a universal influenza vaccine will have to activate both humoral and cellular immune responses, the CMV vaccine vector platform is “unique” given its ability to elicit and maintain long-lived TEM, and this could be paired with a separate platform to stimulate both arms of the immune system. With CMV vectors now in clinical trials for HIV, there’s also a direct pathway forward for testing influenza-specific vectors in humans. “Further such studies are required to determine if CMV-induced TEM can contribute to the development of a universal influenza vaccine,” the authors pointed out. “Inhalation of aerosolized H5N1 influenza virus causes a cascade of events that can trigger respiratory failure,” added co-senior author Simon Barratt-Boyes, PhD, professor of infectious diseases, microbiology and immunology at Pitt. “The immunity induced by the vaccine was sufficient to limit virus infection and lung damage, protecting the monkeys from this very serious infection.” By synthesizing more up-to-date virus templates, the new study suggests CMV vaccines may be able to generate an effective, long-lasting immune response against a wide suite of new variants. “I think it means within five to 10 years, a one-and-done shot for influenza is realistic,” Sacha said. The same CMV platform developed by OHSU researchers has advanced to a clinical trial to protect against HIV, and a recent publication by those scientists suggests it may even be useful targeting specific cancer cells. Sacha sees the development as the latest in the rapid advance of medical research to treat or prevent disease. “It’s a massive sea change within our lifetimes,” Sacha said. “There is no question we are on the cusp of the next generation of how we address infectious disease.” NewsCytomegalovirus vaccineHIVInfluenza vaccineInfluenza virusMemory T-cellsPrimatesSARS-CoV-2 Share FacebookTwitterLinkedinReddItEmail Previous articleHarnessing the Power of g-NK Cells to Treat Hematologic MalignanciesNext articleNanopores Designed From Scratch Using Computational Protein Design Sophia Ktori Also of Interest Improving the Manufacture of mRNA Biologics Nanobody-Adorned IgMs Target Viral Epitopes, Block Mutational Escape Identifying Bioprocess Strategies That Improve SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Production Viruses Lured to Their Doom by Cytoplasmic Condensates Vertical Plant-Based Protein Expression: Lower Cost, Reduced Footprint Alternative Human Stem Cells Repair Retinas in Monkey Models of Macular Holes Related Media Dr. Fauci Reflects on His 54 Year Career at the NIH Shehnaaz Suliman, MD, MPhil, Discusses Targeted Respiratory Therapies on "Close to the Edge" GENcast: Empowering a Precision Health Movement Why Do Some People Hate Cilantro? Gallo at 80: HIV Pioneer Still in the Lab Biologists Reveal the Hidden History of Books Related Content Improving the Manufacture of mRNA Biologics Nanobody-Adorned IgMs Target Viral Epitopes, Block Mutational Escape Identifying Bioprocess Strategies That Improve SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Production Viruses Lured to Their Doom by Cytoplasmic Condensates Read the Digital Edition ExploreAbout GEN Contact GEN GEN Staff Editorial Guidelines Reprints and Permissions Scientific Advisory Board AdvertiseMedia Kit and Planning Calendar Advertising Terms and Conditions ResourcesGet the GEN Magazine Get the GEN Email Newsletter Inside Precision Medicine Privacy Policy Copyright © 2024 Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology News. All Rights Reserved. Scroll Up MORE STORIES Regulus Therapeutics and Duke Univ. Find that Viral miRNAs Mimic Human... Researchers Discover How Fungus Protects Itself from Immune SystemWhat Makes Dairy Cows a Prime Target for Influenza? - Morning Ag Clips Subscribe ❯ PORTAL ❯ LOGIN ❯ By Keyword By topic By state Home Events Jobs Work With Us Skip to primary navigation Skip to main content Skip to primary sidebar Skip to footer Subscribe to ourdaily email❯ SubmitYour Content❯ Login❯ policy tractors & machinery education conservation webinars business dairy cattle poultry swine corn soybeans organic specialty crops Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Home Events Jobs Work With Us Morning Ag Clips Search By keyword By topic By state policy tractors & machinery education conservation webinars business dairy cattle poultry swine corn soybeans organic specialty crops For the best mobile experience, get the MAC App Today!Home » What Makes Dairy Cows a Prime Target for Influenza? dairy livestock health research BIRD FLU AND DAIRY CATTLE ...What Makes Dairy Cows a Prime Target for Influenza?Knowing cows are a biologically suitable home for the flu virus, particularly in their mammary glands, reiterates the dangers of consuming raw milkPUBLISHED ON July 16, 2024Scientists’ understanding of how influenza affects cattle will improve as more data is collected and herds are regularly screened. (Photo: Getty Images, Unsplash)AMES, Iowa — As highly pathogenic avian influenza has spread in dairy herds across the U.S., the virus is being detected in raw milk. A new study by a broad team of researchers at Iowa State University’s College of Veterinary Medicine helps explain why. Sialic acid, a sugar molecule found on the surface of some animal cells, acts as a receptor for influenza. Without sialic acid providing an entry point to attach, invade and infect, a flu virus is unlikely to find a potential host hospitable. Before the recent HPAI outbreak in dairy herds, there was scant research into sialic acid levels in the mammary glands of cattle. Scientists had no reason to suspect the milk-producing organs would be a good target for influenza. “In livestock, we hadn’t usually looked in milk for viruses. Bacteria, sure. But not so much viruses,” said Eric Burrough, professor of veterinary diagnostic and production animal medicine. Microscope images of mammary gland tissue taken from a dairy cow infected with highly pathogenic avian influenza are magnified by 200 times on the left and 400 times on the right. On the left, cells infected with influenza are turquoise and flu receptors are magenta. On the right, infections are bright yellow and receptors are bright red. (Image: Christopher Siepker and Tyler Harm/Iowa State University) A team of Iowa State researchers who examined mammary gland samples from two infected cows found a rich supply of sialic acid, which could shed light on how the virus attaches to hosts and help develop measures to slow the illness’ spread. “We need to stop transmission, and one way to potentially do that is through milking machines. We’re not sure that’s involved with how this is spreading, but it’s one hypothesis,” said Todd Bell, professor of veterinary pathology. All milk sold commercially in stores is pasteurized, and research consistently shows pasteurization neutralizes viruses such as influenza. But knowing cows are a biologically suitable home for the flu virus, particularly in their mammary glands, reiterates the dangers of consuming raw milk and raises questions about how milk from infected cows is discarded, Burrough said. “The idea that the mammary glands are being passively infected is put to rest by this paper,” he said. “They’re pumping out tons of virus, and that’s a risk.” While HPAI isn’t usually deadly for cows, it’s often fatal for birds. Since the start of the outbreak in the U.S., more than 97 million birds have been affected, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Commercial poultry flocks where the virus is detected are typically euthanized. The infected dairy cattle samples ISU researchers examined – both mammary glands and respiratory tissues – had receptors for flu strains that originate from birds as well as humans and pigs. The presence of both types of receptors poses added risks, as a single cell infected by avian and mammalian viruses could lead to potentially dangerous mutations, Bell said. The study was published in the July edition of Emerging Infectious Diseases, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s peer-reviewed journal. Thirteen of its 14 co-authors are from Iowa State, including researchers and faculty from across the College of Veterinary Medicine. Another article in the same edition of Emerging Infectious Diseases – with a list of co-authors that includes 10 ISU researchers – describes the initial diagnosis of HPAI in dairy, a finding made at the ISU Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory this spring. Speedy teamwork in the face of new public health threats is essential, said Rahul Nelli, research assistant professor of veterinary diagnostic and production animal medicine. “Having different departments coming together to collaborate was key for this study and will be key for future investigations,” Nelli said. Further research could involve influenza receptors in other species and organs, including a closer look at dairy cattle, Bell said. The just-published study is based on a handful of samples. Scientists’ understanding of how influenza affects cattle will improve as more data is collected and herds are regularly screened. “Surveillance will be really important moving forward, not only through this event but in the years to come,” Burrough said. –Iowa State University via EurekAlert! Spread the word RECOMMENDED ARTICLES Vaccine could protect against chronic wasting afflictionJune 25, 2019WASHINGTON — A team of Agricultural Research Service (ARS) and university scientists is investigating a new “ingredient” for use in vaccinating cattle against Johne’s disease, a chronic wasting affliction that costs […] How can traction milling prevent lameness in dairy cattle?August 16, 2021WASHINGTON — While the subject of barn flooring might seem cut-and-dry, the type of flooring you choose for your barn build can actually have a huge impact on your cattle’s […] Cattle Industry Consortium Funds Methane Emission ResearchSeptember 14, 2023CHAMPAIGN, Ill. & MADISON, Wis. — On Sept. 14, the Greener Cattle Initiative (GCI), a multi-partner international consortium investing in research mitigating enteric methane, awarded additional grants to reduce enteric […] FFAR’s Rapid Response Program Welcomes Avian Flu Research ProposalsJune 20, 2024WASHINGTON — Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) is spreading across the country and infecting a range of animals from birds to sea mammals. Recently, the virus has spread to dairy […] Browse More Clips This Summer’s Weirdest Food Combos You’ll Either Love or Hate Sweet, Native and Nutritious: Blueberries Make a Great Garden Snack Primary Sidebar MORENATIONAL CLIPS SARE Awards $8M to Food Loss and Waste ProjectsNovember 11, 2024 USDA Seeks Public Input on Climate Benefits of Conservation Practice StandardsNovember 11, 2024 Heartier Heinz? How Scientists Are Learning to Help Tomatoes Beat the HeatNovember 11, 2024 Mexico and US Reach Agreement on Water-Sharing PaymentsNovember 11, 2024 US Extends Avocado Import Permissions to Guatemala, but Don’t Expect Cheaper GuacamoleNovember 11, 2024 Trending Latest TRENDING CLIPS Svalbard Global Seed Vault Evokes Epic Imagery and Controversy November 4, 2024 Bio-Based Fibers Could Pose Greater Threat to the Environment Than Conventional Plastics November 5, 2024 DEC Declares Drougt Watch for 15 New York Counties November 6, 2024 Mexico City’s Floating Gardens Have Fed People for Hundreds of Years. Now They’re Threatened November 6, 2024 Turkey Prices Low Ahead of Thanksgiving Holiday November 6, 2024 One Step Closer to an Alternative Fruit and Vegetable Treatment Option November 5, 2024 Carl Sagan’s Scientific Legacy Extends Far Beyond ‘Cosmos’ November 5, 2024 Native Warm Season Grasses: A Drought-Resistant Forage? November 5, 2024 YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE... Indiana November Crop Production ForecastNovember 11, 2024 Michigan Wheat Program Board Elects 2024-25 OfficersNovember 11, 2024 Michigan 2024 Potato Production ForecastNovember 11, 2024 Health & Taste Rated as Most Important Considerations When Purchasing MeatNovember 11, 2024 USAID Selects K-State for Multimillion-Dollar Project on Climate Resilience and Sustainable Intensification of AgricultureNovember 11, 2024 FooterMORNING AG CLIPS Contact Us Sponsors About Us Advertise with Us Privacy Statement Terms of Service Write For Us CONNECT WITH US Like Us on Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Twitter YouTube TikTok TRACK YOUR TRADE Markets & Economy Cattle Updates Dairy News Policy & Politics Corn Alerts QUICK LINKS Account Portal Membership Just Me, Kate Morning Ag Communications Weather Beef Blueprints Submissions Get the MAC App Today! © 2024 Morning Ag Clips, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Stay In The Know! Subscribe to Your Favorite Newsletter! Click here to Subscribe today by selecting your desired edition and scrolling down to click “All Set!” From the field to your inbox, the Weekend Edition of the Morning Ag Clips features stories, trends, and unique perspectives from the farming community. Morning Ag Clips. All Ag. All the time. CLOSE Search Post Post Filter Apply Filters Close CLOSE Search Post Post Filter Apply Filters Close CLOSE Mac Calendar Contest Photo Contest Name(Required) First Last Email(Required) Enter Email Confirm Email Your Photo Entry(Required) Drop files here or Select files Accepted file types: jpg, jpeg, png, Max. file size: 50 MB, Max. files: 5. Please attach a high-resolution image that is at least 900 by 500 pixels. Please provide a caption for your photo along with town and state you are located in.(Required)Competition Terms and Conditions(Required)Terms and Conditions are outlined below in the Terms and Conditions section of the Calendar Photo Contest page I agree to the competition terms and conditions.CAPTCHA ×Episode 20 – Fowl threat: is avian flu going viral? | EFSA Skip to main content An official EU websiteAn official website of the European Union How do you know? All official European Union website addresses are in the <b>europa.eu</b> domain Other sites EFSA Open EFSA EFSA Journal Connect European Food Safety Authority en English Select your language българскиespañolčeštinadanskDeutscheestiελληνικάEnglishfrançaisGaeilgehrvatskiitalianolatviešulietuviųmagyarMaltiNederlandspolskiportuguêsromânăslovenčinaslovenščinasuomisvenska Calendar Menu About About us Mission and values Transparency Working practices Trusted science External experts Governance Management Board members Executive Director Operational Management Documents Corporate publications Partners EU Member States EU institutions and agencies Competent organisations in Member States International Stakeholder engagement Newsroom All contents News Data visualization Videos Podcast Infographics Factsheets Campaigns Safe2Eat PlantHealth4Life Topics All topics Animal health Animal welfare Antimicrobial resistance Chemical contaminants in food and feed Foodborne zoonotic diseases Nutrition Pesticides Qualified presumption of safety (QPS) Glossary Resources Data reports Data standardisation Food tracing Data collection Methodology Guidance Evidence Tools and resources Dietary Exposure (DietEx) tool Publications Applications Application procedures Biological hazards and animal welfare Feed additives Food contact materials Food improvement agents GMO Novel foods and traditional foods Nutrition Pesticides Services for applicants Services for SMEs Ask a question Toolkit QPS assessment Confidentiality and sanitisation Engage Procurement Closed tenders below €143k Instructions and forms Grants ISA scheme Fellowship Programme Calls for data Consultations Observers Research Platform Stakeholders Engagement platforms Engagement in risk assessment Calls for stakeholders Stakeholder registration Careers Working at EFSA Benefits Scientists Experts Staff members Traineeships How to apply Open positions Calendar Other sites Open EFSA EFSA Journal Connect Search Main navigationAboutAbout usMission and valuesTransparencyWorking practicesTrusted scienceExternal expertsGovernanceManagement Board membersExecutive DirectorOperational ManagementDocumentsCorporate publicationsPartnersEU Member StatesEU institutions and agenciesCompetent organisations in Member StatesInternationalStakeholder engagementNewsroomAll contentsNewsData visualizationVideosPodcastInfographicsFactsheetsCampaignsSafe2EatPlantHealth4LifeTopicsAll topicsAnimal healthAnimal welfareAntimicrobial resistanceChemical contaminants in food and feedFoodborne zoonotic diseasesNutritionPesticidesQualified presumption of safety (QPS)GlossaryResourcesData reportsData standardisationFood tracingData collectionMethodologyGuidanceEvidenceTools and resourcesDietary Exposure (DietEx) toolPublicationsApplicationsApplication proceduresBiological hazards and animal welfareFeed additivesFood contact materialsFood improvement agentsGMONovel foods and traditional foodsNutritionPesticidesServices for applicantsToolkitQPS assessmentConfidentiality and sanitisationEngageProcurementClosed tenders below €143kInstructions and formsGrantsISA schemeFellowship ProgrammeCalls for dataConsultationsObserversResearch PlatformStakeholdersEngagement platformsEngagement in risk assessmentCalls for stakeholdersStakeholder registrationCareersWorking at EFSABenefitsScientistsExpertsStaff membersTraineeshipsHow to applyOpen positions HomeAll contentsPodcast Episode 20 – Fowl threat: is avian flu going viral? Published date:17 July 2024 Duration:23:30 Share: Share via Twitter Share via Facebook Share via Linkedin Avian flu has decimated poultry and wild birds around the globe in recent years. The virus has now spread extensively among mammals, affecting more than 50 species from cats to sea lions. The disease was recently discovered in dairy cows in North America and some farm workers were infected, causing widespread alarm. Could this be the next pandemic? Can we stop it spreading? Will vaccination help? Join us as we investigate why avian flu is making headlines and what we can do about it.Listen on:Spotify Apple Podcasts Transcript of the episode Intro (00:09:22) Science on the Menu, a podcast by the European Food Safety Authority.James (00:20:04)Hello everyone and welcome to this episode of Science on the Menu, EFSA’s podcast. My name is James Ramsay and today we're returning to the topic of avian influenza, something that we first discussed last year in an episode back in March 2023. As those of you who follow the news closely will know, the topic of avian influenza is something that's still grabbing headlines over a year later. We're going to explore why that might be the case with a couple of EFSA’s animal health experts. So, I'm very happy to welcome to the podcast Lisa Kohnle and Alessandro Broglia, who are both from the animal health team here at EFSA and who have been contributing their knowledge and expertise to the scientific advice we have produced on avian influenza.So, Lisa, Alessandro, a warm welcome to you both. How are you both doing? Lisa (01:08:14)Thanks a lot for the invitation. Very busy on the topic as usual. James (01:12:11)Good, good. And I’m going to call you ‘Ale’, is that okay? So, we refer to you affectionately as Ale instead of Alessandro.Alessandro (01:16:16)Very much okay, as everyone calls me.James (01:22:23) Very briefly, just give people a sense of who you are and what it is that you do here at EFSA. Maybe starting with you, Lisa.Lisa (01:31:18)Yeah, so thanks for the introduction. I'm Lisa Kohnle. I'm originally from Germany but have travelled quite a bit around the world since I finished my veterinary degree. Most importantly, maybe to mention, I did a PhD on avian influenza which brought me to Bangladesh, a completely different setting than which I'm working in right now. But it gave me, I think, the right field experiments to really understand what the data means that I'm working with nowadays. And fortunately, after my PhD, I had the opportunity to come back to EFSA to work as a scientific officer on actually a variety of different topics, but recently more and more on avian influenza as it is such a big issue for all of us. So, I'm happy to continue my work here.James (02:20:00) Okay, so very qualified to be talking to us today about avian influenza. Can you match that, Ale? What's your background and what do you do here at EFSA?Alessandro (02:28:23)Thank you, James. I'm also a veterinarian and in EFSA since 15 years already now, so pretty long. And in my former life, I spent many years in Africa, more in the field, also dealing with animal health issues and animal diseases. So, from the field to more the theory. But I have to say that in the last years we did a lot, and more and more with epidemics. And here we are. I mean, it's not a new topic, but still changing its aspect every day in the news. So yes, very challenging, but also very intriguing to discuss this today with you.James (03:16:16)Great, so let's jump straight in. You mentioned that avian influenza is still a topic that you see being reported in the news a lot and we were talking about this a year ago. I wanted to get a sense, first of all, about how the situation has developed since then. So maybe Lisa we could start with you on that one?Lisa (03:40:10) Yes, sure. So, when you recorded the last episode of the podcast, I think you were just at the beginning of spring where we would expect that the cases go down a bit during the summer period. But what we actually experienced last year in Europe is that the cases didn't decline over the summer months because they were so widespread in the wild bird population, especially in the sea birds in a lot of different gulls and tern species that actually we were seeing mass mortality events throughout summer in many different wild bird colonies, especially seabirds across Europe. So, for example, the United Kingdom was heavily affected, there was a lot of population decline and a lot of wild bird species. And of course, this also leads to a very high contamination of the environment, which then poses a risk to poultry because then it's easier for them to get infected. So, at the same time, we were seeing still a lot of outbreaks in poultry during those months that are usually very quiet. So of course, that's a challenge for our stakeholders in Europe because usually during those months they can maybe relax a little bit, they can maybe prepare for the following season, which starts around September, October. But they were kept busy throughout those months.James (04:58:03)Why would we normally see a kind of dip in the summer months and rise in the winter months? Is that to do with the migratory patterns of wild birds? Lisa (05:08:17) Yes, exactly. So usually in autumn wild birds would come from different parts of the world to Europe. They would mix, they would roost, they would breed in certain areas and that would give a lot of potential for transmission, for exchange between different species. But once we reach a stage where there is so much virus in the environment, as it was for example last year even during the summer months, the virus doesn't disappear anymore because normally under certain environmental conditions, high temperature etcetera, it doesn't have good chances to survive in the environment. But if it is there in such high concentrations like last year, it remains in the population.James (05:54:01) Okay, so that's a bit the situation in Europe. Obviously one thing that we can't avoid mentioning is what's happened in the US in recent months - so the outbreaks that have been seen in herds of dairy cattle. Can you talk to us a bit more about that, what we know, what we don't know, and maybe most importantly does this pose a risk? Does this new development give us reason to be concerned?Lisa (06:20:16) Yeah, so what we see since the beginning of the current season, which started last year in October, is that the situation in Europe is actually improving due to certain factors. For example, those wild birds that I mentioned have declined, so there are not many susceptible birds around anymore and some of them might also have acquired a level of immunity. Whereas in other parts of the world where the virus has arrived later, such as in the Americas, it met certain species, certain animals (birds and also mammals) that were never exposed to the virus before. And that is always when a peak in cases occurs, when there is a lot of clinical signs, a lot of mortality, when really a new species is affected. And this is what happened in the Americas last year. It actually started in the Southern part, in South America, where we have seen massive mortality events in sea lions, southern elephant seals, etcetera. So, there were really thousands and thousands of deaths around the coastlines of South America. And then towards the winter months from November, December onwards, the focus was really on North America.And it started with a lot of outbreaks in poultry. During the last couple of months, outbreaks in poultry are really focused on North America, more than 80% of poultry outbreaks worldwide are focused on North America. And in the following weeks, months, we became aware of these cases in mammals, and in many different mammal species, which is concerning so many new species in the Americas.And finally, also in ruminants. It all started in March with the first reports of goat kids that showed neurological signs and died in the United States. And a few days later we became aware of the first detections in cattle. This is concerning to us because this is a species group that we were not so much looking into because ruminants, there have been some experiments in the lab before on those species, but they were never really considered to be naturally infectable. But then we learned something different, we were taught otherwise. Unfortunately, what also now contributes to the picture we have been seeing is that this was detected much later than when it first happened because of the reason that we were not expecting it in that species.James (09:06:15) Okay, that's interesting. I'm going to bring Ale in here, maybe just to try and put a bit of all of this in context. I mean, particularly if we talk about the situation in the U.S. dairy cattle, there have been reports of the virus also being found in milk. When we think about risk to humans, the risk of transmission via food, what do we know, what do we say at the moment about that? Where do things stand.Alessandro (09:33:116) At the moment, I mean we have no strong evidence that the virus can be transmitted through food to humans. Of course, the issue of finding the virus in milk was very scary because it's kind of a staple food consumed by a lot of people. But, if we are talking about pasteurized milk, there is no evidence that this represents a major risk.So, the concern with food is probably not the main one with avian influenza. What is maybe more worrying and that we are maybe nowadays more at that step, of checking which risks represent, are the people in touch with these animals. So, in domestic farms, of course, you have, workers and people, in very close contact with these animals, the so-called ‘occupationally exposed people.’ And that category of people is really to keep monitoring because they are the front end of this risk of ‘spillover’. Spillover means when the virus is transmitted from one species to another. And of course, humans can be also one species that may receive this. In fact, we have seen luckily very few cases seen in humans from those in contact with either cows or other infected animals.James (11:11:13) So, I think that it's the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, one of our sister agencies, that talks about risk to human health. If I'm correct, they say that the risk to the general population from avian influenza is still low, but occupationally exposed people, so workers in farms and so on, who come into contact with wild birds or poultry or whatever it may be, that the risk is slightly elevated for them.Alessandro (11:36:11)Exactly. That’s why we also collaborate very closely, especially with avian influenza, with ECDC, and in different projects we have now basically always together. It's kind of a One Health issue now, in the real sense of the term, and yes that's why we collaborate so strongly now.James (11:59:00) Okay. I want to just to take a step back. I know that a lot of the kind of work that we do at EFSA is about looking at what might increase the likelihood of spread of this virus. So, can you talk to us a bit about what are the drivers that make the spread of avian influenza more likely?Alessandro (12:21:15) As Lisa mentioned before, of course the first concern is in the bird population. We have wild birds that are carrying the virus here and there through migration and so on. And then our domestic, poultry farms have, in reality, been the most affected by this. So, with huge infections and then it brought the culling a lot of birds and this environmental contamination with a lot of virus in the environment. Of course, every practice, concerning human activities in farming animals and in general in agricultural practices, these also can represent the kind of drivers for spread of the infection because it may increase somehow the exposure of animal species, or of humans, or even certain environmental compartment to the infection with the virus. So, whenever we deal with different animal species, maybe farming together, farming very closely or a lot of poultry farms in the same environment or very close to certain wetlands - we know that wetlands represent the place of aggregation for wild birds that may carry the infection. These are all kind of, let’s say, risky steps and we should take care about these. This is where we should actually plan our preparedness. We should not wait for having this, what people are worried about is that you have these human-to-human transmission then, because it may become a large epidemic or even a pandemic - we don't want to use this word again, but we don't have to arrive there. So, we have to really work much in advance. And, I mean, collecting information and being vigilant at that stage, even at different animal species, where we breed them - this is actually where preparedness should be.James (14:21:00) Okay, that's great, it leads on to the next question I was going to ask you Lisa actually about what can we do to prevent the spread, either as me and you - you know average people, men and women on the street - or others in society who are coming into contact with birds or indeed as regulatory authorities, governments, I don't know - what is there that we can do to help prevent this spread?Lisa (14:46:17) To pick up on also what Ale just said - the spread is actually what follows after the virus has been introduced in a certain, let's say population or farm or human population. So once this has already happened, which we're actually trying to prevent in the first place, you are probably still remember what we did during the COVID 19 pandemic.So there are certain control measures that you can use, such as restricting movement of animals or people, isolating animals or people, especially for farm animals. We have strict regulations in place. So poultry, for example, would need to be culled, which is of course, the most drastic measure. But it immediately stops the spread to other poultry farms or to humans. What we should actually improve is, even a step before that, we should improve our prevention to prevent the virus from entering such a farm or population in the first place. And that we can only do through very strong early warning systems and also through monitoring and surveillance.James (1:55:19) Okay, we use these terms a lot at EFSA - surveillance, monitoring - they can be quite kind of dry concepts. Can you explain maybe what does that mean in the context of avian influenza when we talk about surveillance and monitoring, what are we actually doing?Lisa (16:09:02) Let's start maybe with monitoring. Monitoring just means that we are looking out for signals that tell us something important and then we see how to deal with it. And, for example, in EFSA here for the avian influenza monitoring, of course we are continuously collecting data from a variety of different sources, for example from member states, from international organizations on the outbreaks that they are experiencing. So those are actually reported confirmed outbreaks, meaning those animals have been sampled, they have been tested, and they are really positive. This would be, let's say, our most reliable data that we are collecting.But then what we have recently started here at EFSA, and which has proven very successful so far, is also monitoring other kinds of signals. So, we are currently monitoring the news media and a lot of social media for other kinds of signals that are published by either people posting on social media or government reports in other languages, because this is where you really receive information firsthand. It's also very important because in other parts of the world, the report and notification channels take much more time than in Europe. So, if we want to know what is cooking in Asia and Africa, we actually need to rely on those grey channels. Here, of course, the challenge is we really need to judge is this information trustworthy or not? Can we use this as an official communication or not? And then we have to follow up with those countries, we would probably request additional information etcetera but it's very interesting.James (17:47:19) So you have some creative strategies for getting the information you need.Okay, very good. I’ll go back to Ale - just one other aspect of the debate which has come up in recent weeks and months is this topic of vaccination, vaccination as a preventative strategy. So can you talk to us a bit more about what that might mean? And then obviously the work that we're doing at EFSA in that area? Alessandro (18:17:14) Yes, of course. When we deal with infectious disease and especially with viral disease, we think about vaccination because it sounds like the biggest solution and magic wand to solve the problem. So you just get your shot and then you are immune for the rest of your life. That would be really nice. In this case, vaccinating poultry against avian influenza is something really new, that only in France is running in certain categories of poultry because we had huge epidemics in France. So, and then they had to complement, let's say, the preventive measure with something more. But we should not think about vaccination as the one single solution for this. This should be coupled and included in, in a series of measures, in a kind of plan, and seen as a part of the solution to the problem. We cannot imagine that vaccination confers a lifelong immunity. We always have the same level for the animal. So it requires several shots and so on. So huge resources to implement the campaign. Sometimes is not the problem only to have a good vaccine but you have also to implement a good vaccination campaign - which implies personal, structures, means of communication, also awareness and readiness of the farmers to accept the vaccination and so on, and cost of course.So in this sense this is really something as part of a plan and then you may have, probably you have heard in the news in these days, vaccination for avian flu also for humans, there are some doses that have been allocated for certain categories of people, as we were discussing before, the most exposed ones. So in certain contexts, you may foresee to use vaccination against avian flu in humans.But besides that since influenza viruses are really, very dynamic viruses and can change every time and recombine and reassort with other viruses. Even the usual seasonal influenza. I mean, we know that we have a vaccine for the population against death that should also be considered because if you get vaccinated against the seasonal influenza, then it means you can control a little bit the probability of reassortment of this virus between avian flu and other influenza viruses. So that's a kind of, multifaceted, preventive measures against the same problem that has still different colours and nuances.James (21:21:06) Sure, Okay. And at EFSA we are providing, and have provided, several scientific opinions or pieces of advice on vaccination. We continue to inform what we call our risk managers, so the European Commission, Member States and so on.Alessandro (21:28:21) Yeah there's a couple of, let's say, two main outputs about the vaccination against avian flu in poultry - very useful for our risk managers, but also for Member States because that was really the scientific base to understand, okay - we go, we don't go - there are vaccines available. What kind of surveillance should be put in place while vaccinating just after vaccination? So to be sure that there is no so-called ‘silent spread’ of the virus among vaccinated poultry population. So yes, two scientific opinions that have a real good echo and very well received by politicians and managers. So, I would say that EFSA, yes, in that sense we are very much contributing.James (22:24:24) Very good. Okay, guys, we're going to leave it there. We'll let you get back to your very important work. Thanks very much for being with us on the podcast today. Maybe we'll have you back again. I have a feeling this is an issue that we'll be discussing and talking about in another year's time. So it could be that we get you back on the podcast.To our listeners, thanks very much for joining us. I hope you found this useful and interesting. if you'd like more information about avian influenza, or any of the work that we do here at EFSA, please make sure to check out our website and our social media channels. And I should also give a plug to our sister agency - the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control - which as we discussed just now is also working on the topic of avian influenza.That's it for now. We see you all next time. Thanks very much.Your opinion matters! Please take this brief survey to share your thoughts on our podcastPodcast detailsHost:James Ramsay, Head of the Communication Unit at EFSAGuests:Lisa Kohnle and Alessandro Broglia, Scientific Officers in the Animal Health team at EFSA James Ramsay, Lisa Kohnle, Alessandro BrogliaDisclaimer: Views expressed by interviewees do not necessarily represent the official position of the European Food Safety Authority. All content is up to date at the time of publication. Related topics Animal health Avian influenza Contents Contents Page contents Did this page meet your expectations ? Yes No Thank you! Any more feedback? I have found the information I was looking for The content was easy to understand There was the right amount of information Other (please specify below) Can you help us make it better for you — Why didn’t it meet your expectations? I did not find the information I was looking for The content was difficult to understand There was too much or too little information Technical problem (please specify below) Other (please specify below) Please specify below: What else positively affected your experience? What could be improved to make your experience better? We value your anonymous feedback and use it to continually improve your experience. If you require an individual response, please visit our Contact us page. About Executive Director Management Board Transparency Regulation Corporate documents Engage Careers Consultations Procurement Grants Connect Newsletters & email alerts Press Centre Contact us Access OpenEFSA EFSA Journal on Wiley Connect EFSA extranet (DMS) Follow us on RSSXInstagramLinkedinYoutubeSpotifyScience, safe food, sustainabilityLegal noticePersonal Data ProtectionMultilingual practiceAccessibilityWebsite release notesColorado bird flu cases suggest extreme heat may be complicating efforts to control the virus | CNN CNN values your feedback 1. How relevant is this ad to you? 2. Did you encounter any technical issues? Video player was slow to load content Video content never loaded Ad froze or did not finish loading Video content did not start after ad Audio on ad was too loud Other issues Ad never loaded Ad prevented/slowed the page from loading Content moved around while ad loaded Ad was repetitive to ads I've seen previously Other issues Cancel Submit Thank You! Your effort and contribution in providing this feedback is much appreciated. Close Ad Feedback Close icon Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships More Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Watch Listen Live TV Subscribe Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch Edition US International Arabic Español Edition US International Arabic Español Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Follow CNN World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Ad Feedback Colorado bird flu cases show how extreme heat may be complicating efforts to control the virus By Brenda Goodman, CNN 5 minute read Published 5:13 PM EDT, Tue July 16, 2024 Link Copied! The CDC says the threat to the general public from bird flu remains low. DigicomPhoto/Science Photo Library/Getty Images CNN — Searing heat may have played a role in the infections of five workers who fell ill last week while culling a large flock of chickens infected with the H5N1 virus in Colorado, health officials said Tuesday. “At the time transmission is thought to have occurred, Colorado was experiencing 104-plus-degree heat,” and it was probably hotter inside the barns, said Dr. Nirav Shah, principal deputy director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC is investigating the outbreak along with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. This Transmission Electron Micrograph Tem, Taken At A Magnification Of 108,000X, Revealed The Ultrastructural Details Of Two Avian Influenza A H5N1 Virions, A Type Of Bird Flu Virus, Which Is A Subtype Of Avian Influenza A. At This Magnification, One May Note The Stippled Appearance Of The Roughened Surface Of The Proteinaceous Coat Encasing Each Virion. Although This Virus Does Not Typically Infect Humans, In 1997, The First Instance Of Direct Bird To Human Spread Of Influenza A H5N1 Virus Was Documented During An Outbreak Of Avian Influenza Among Poultry In Hong Kong. The Virus Caused Severe Respiratory Illness In 18 People, Of Whom, 6 Had Died. Since That Time, There Have Been Other Instances Of H5N1 Infection Among Humans. During August To October, 2004, Sporadic Human Cases Of Avian Influenza A H5N1 Were Reported In Vietnam And Thailand. Since December, 2004, A Resurgence Of Poultry Outbreaks And Human Cases Has Been Reported In Vietnam. On February 2, 2005, The First Of Four Human Cases Of H5N1 Infection From Cambodia Was Reported. On July 21, 2005, The First Human Case Of H5N1 In Indonesia Was Reported, And Since Then Indonesia Has Continued To Report Human Cases In August, September, And October, 2005. (Photo By BSIP/UIG Via Getty Images) BSIP/UIG/Getty Images Related article More cases of bird flu identified in Colorado poultry workers This made the use of personal protective equipment a challenge, Shah said. In addition, to bring down temperatures in the sweltering barns, large industrial fans were blowing, moving air as well as dust and feathers. Feathers from infected birds are known to carry the H5N1 virus. “We understand those large fans … were moving so much air … the workers were finding it hard to maintain a good seal or a good fit either between the mask or with eye protection,” Shah said. Four of the Colorado cases have been confirmed by the CDC. A fifth tested positive at a state lab and has been sent to the CDC for confirmation. The incident has quickly doubled the number of farm workers known to be infected with H5N1 virus in the United States, and it is the largest number of workers known to be infected in connection with a single farm. In 2022, a poultry worker tested positive for H5N1 in Colorado. This year, four other farm workers have tested positive — one in Texas, two in Michigan and another in Colorado — after working with infected dairy cattle. Cases are believed to be undercounted because farm workers are often reluctant to be tested for fear of losing work and income. Dead birds are collected along the coast in the Vadso municipality of Finnmark in Norway following a major outbreak of bird flu on July 20, 2023. Oyvind Zahl Arntzen/NTB/AFP/Getty Images Related article Bird flu is rampant in animals. Humans ignore it at our own peril Genetic analysis of the virus from one of the recent human cases involved in the poultry culling was reassuring, Shah said, because it didn’t show any mutations that might indicate the virus is spreading more readily to people. Testing also showed that the virus was closely related to the strain spreading in cattle. At the state of Colorado’s request, the CDC has sent a 10-person team to assist with the investigation and contact tracing in the outbreak. Sixty people have shown symptoms consistent with bird flu, and all but five have tested negative at a state laboratory, Shah said. “We’ve seen strong uptake of testing across this particular farm in Colorado,” he added. None of the workers was hospitalized, and many had traditional flu symptoms, including conjunctivitis or eye infections, fever, chills, coughing and sore throats. The workers have been offered an antiviral medication and are recovering. Altogether, about 160 people are involved in the culling, or killing, of 1.8 million egg-laying chickens on the Colorado farm, which is a “significant” egg-producing operation that officials didn’t name. The culling operation is expected to continue another 10 to 14 days. It is not clear how the birds became infected, but viruses isolated from the birds are closely related to the same strain that’s infecting dairy cattle, said Dr. Eric Deeble, the US Department of Agriculture’s acting senior adviser of the H5N1 response. The CDC maintains that the threat to the public of the H5N1 bird flu virus is low. However, farm workers are at higher risk of catching the infection, which has recently spread from domestic and wild birds to dairy cattle and other mammals. A dairy worker's infection is important because it confirms that humans can be infected with H5N1 after contact with cows. CDC Related article What a US farmworker’s case of bird flu tells us about tracking the infection To stay safe, the CDC recommends that people working with sick or dead cattle or birds wear personal protective equipment, or PPE, which includes waterproof coveralls, a face mask, goggles or a face shield, boots, gloves and a head covering. Workers involved in the culling of the chickens in Colorado were required to wear the full uniform, but environmental conditions made it difficult to keep on. “We understand that PPE use was not optimal, particularly the masks and the eye protection,” Shah said. The United Farm Workers labor union has questioned whether the CDC’s recommendations are practical given the record-breaking heat enveloping much of the United States this summer. It had called on the CDC to rethink its PPE guidance so more people could follow it. “These are people that are being asked to put their lives on the line for a virus we don’t understand all that well when they have no reasonable way of protecting themselves from either the virus or from heat illness,” Elizabeth Strater, director of strategic campaigns for United Farm Workers, said Tuesday. “They’re being put in an impossible position.” Workers wear fluid-proof coveralls, Strater points out, which prevent sweat from cooling their bodies, making it easy to overheat. In dirty, wet environments like a barn, masks and respirators can become clogged or soggy within minutes. Get CNN Health's weekly newsletter Sign up here to get The Results Are In with Dr. Sanjay Gupta every Friday from the CNN Health team. The CDC said it is working to refine its PPE recommendations to account for the heat. “We’ve sent, as part of our team, a specialist in these matters, an industrial hygienist who can help implement improved engineering controls that may make PPE use more uniform as well as more palatable,” Shah said. Strater said it’s time for the CDC to consider vaccinating farmworkers, as Finland is, to give them – and the general public – an added layer of protection from the virus and from the threat of another pandemic if it spreads. “They need to be prioritized, not just because it’s moral to protect their lives by prioritizing vaccination, but it’s a relatively small group of people, when you think about the sort of firewall they’re creating around the rest of the general public,” she said. “This is not a huge number of people we need to be protecting. These are people who are on the front lines and who are so intimately exposed.” Although US health officials have stressed that they have no plans to distribute an H5N1 vaccine, they are getting several candidates ready to be deployed in case the virus becomes more dangerous. In May, the US Department of Health and Human Services announced that it was ordering 4.8 million doses of H5N1 vaccine to be manufactured from bulk ingredients in the country’s Strategic National Stockpile. Those doses are expected to be ready by the end of the month. In early July, HHS announced that it had paid Moderna $176 million to support the development of an mRNA-based vaccine against H5N1. The agency said it expects to see phase 1 clinical trial results on the safety of that vaccine by the end of the year. Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Ad Feedback Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Live TV Listen Watch World Africa Americas Asia Australia China Europe India Middle East United Kingdom US Politics SCOTUS Congress Facts First 2024 Elections Business Tech Media Calculators Videos Markets Pre-markets After-Hours Fear & Greed Investing Markets Now Nightcap Health Life, But Better Fitness Food Sleep Mindfulness Relationships Entertainment Movies Television Celebrity Tech Innovate Foreseeable Future Mission: Ahead Work Transformed Innovative Cities Style Arts Design Fashion Architecture Luxury Beauty Video Travel Destinations Food & Drink Stay News Videos Sports Football Tennis Golf Motorsport US Sports Olympics Climbing Esports Hockey Watch Live TV CNN Fast Shows A-Z CNN10 CNN Max CNN TV Schedules Listen CNN 5 Things Chasing Life with Dr. Sanjay Gupta The Assignment with Audie Cornish One Thing Tug of War CNN Political Briefing The Axe Files All There Is with Anderson Cooper All CNN Audio podcasts Science Space Life Unearthed Climate Solutions Weather Features As Equals Call to Earth Freedom Project Impact Your World Inside Africa CNN Heroes Weather Video Climate Ukraine-Russia War Israel-Hamas War About CNN Photos Investigations CNN Profiles CNN Leadership CNN Newsletters Work for CNN Health Watch Listen Live TV Follow CNN Sign in My Account Settings Topics You Follow Sign Out Your CNN account Sign in to your CNN account Terms of Use Privacy Policy Ad Choices Accessibility & CC About Newsletters Transcripts © 2024 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved. CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network.No Asymptomatic Bird Flu Infections in Dairy Farmworkers, Small Study Finds | MedPage Today CME Healthcare Jobs Synopsi Edit Profile Manage Subscriptions CME Tracker Log Out Login Sign Up Specialties Back Allergy & Immunology Anesthesiology Cardiology Critical Care Dermatology Emergency Medicine Endocrinology Gastroenterology Genetics Geriatrics HIV / AIDS Hospital-Based Medicine Infectious Disease Nephrology Neurology Nursing OB / GYN Oncology / Hematology Ophthalmology Orthopedics Pain Management Pathology Pediatrics Pharmacy Primary Care Psychiatry Pulmonology Radiology Rheumatology Surgery Transplantation Urology Perspectives Health Policy Meetings Special Reports Break Room Conditions Back Condition Centers DocAudio Making the Rounds Medical Journeys Society Partners Back AAD Reading Room ACR Reading Room AGA Reading Room ASCO Reading Room Endocrine Society Reading Room IDSA Reading Room OMA Reading Room Infectious Disease > General Infectious Disease No Asymptomatic Bird Flu Infections in Dairy Farmworkers, Small Study Finds — But officials announce two more cases among farmworkers in Colorado by Associated Press July 19, 2024 MedpageToday Share on Facebook. Opens in a new tab or window Share on X. Opens in a new tab or window Share on LinkedIn. Opens in a new tab or window email article (Cynthia Goldsmith, Jackie Katz/CDC via AP, File) U.S. health officials on Friday said a new study in Michigan suggested the bird flu virus is not causing asymptomatic infections in people, while also announcing two new human cases in Colorado. Last month, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services launched a study of workers who were around cows sickened by the bird flu. The researchers drew blood from 35 people. One goal was to determine if there were people who never had any symptoms but did have evidence of past infections. None of the blood testing showed antibodies that would indicate infections with the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) virus circulating among dairy cattle and poultry, the CDC reported on Friday. "The lack of antibodies to avian influenza A(H5N1) virus suggests these people were not previously infected with an avian influenza A(H5N1) influenza virus," the agency said. "These data are consistent with other data demonstrating the seroprevalence to HPAI A(H5N1), even among workers with known exposures, is low." Many of the workers did show antibodies to seasonal flu, which was used as a control virus in the study. Researchers will continue to sample workers, and the data will be analyzed and prepared for a peer-reviewed publication, the CDC said. Meanwhile, two more infections tied to a Colorado poultry farm were reported, bringing the total to six. It's the largest outbreak of human bird flu infections in U.S. history, and accounts for most of the 11 cases reported to date. Ten of those cases occurred this year, all among farmworkers and all with mild symptoms. A bird flu virus has been spreading since 2020 among mammals -- including dogs, cats, skunks, bears, and even seals and porpoises -- in scores of countries. Earlier this year the virus, known as H5N1, was detected in U.S. livestock, and is now circulating in cattle in several states. Health officials continue to characterize the threat to the general public as low, and the virus has not spread between people. But officials are keeping careful watch, because earlier versions of the same virus have been deadly. Share on Facebook. Opens in a new tab or window Share on X. Opens in a new tab or window Share on LinkedIn. Opens in a new tab or window email article Comment Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. Visit us on Facebook. Opens in a new tab or window Visit us on X. Opens in a new tab or window Visit us on Instagram. Opens in a new tab or window Visit us on LinkedIn. Opens in a new tab or window Visit us on TikTok. Opens in a new tab or window Visit us on YouTube. Opens in a new tab or window Subscribe for Free About Help Center Terms of Use Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Advertise With Us AdChoices Accessibility Statement visit everydayhealthgroup.com visit healthecareers.com/ visit medpagetoday.com visit primeinc.org The material on this site is for informational purposes only, and is not a substitute for medical advice, diagnosis or treatment provided by a qualified health care provider. © 2005–2024 MedPage Today, LLC, a Ziff Davis company. All rights reserved. MedPage Today is among the federally registered trademarks of MedPage Today, LLC and may not be used by third parties without explicit permission.Bird flu outbreak at Colorado farm as 5 workers reported positive: Experts warn of ‘turning point,’ call for urgent action | FortuneHomeNewsTechFinanceLeadershipWellRecommendsFortune 500Home PageAlready have an account?SIGN INSEARCHSubscribe NowSectionsFORTUNE 500NewsEuropeAsiaTechAIFinancePersonal FinanceReal EstateCryptoLeadershipSuccessWellLifeHealthMindFamilyAging WellRecommendsCredit CardsBankingBest High-Yield Savings AccountsBest Savings AccountsBest CD RatesBest Money Market AccountsSavings CalculatorInsuranceMortgagesInvestingLoansHealthEducationTop Business SchoolsTop Information Technology and Data SchoolsTop Health SchoolsBusiness SolutionsVideoRankingsFORTUNE 500GLOBAL 500MOST POWERFUL WOMENGREAT PLACE TO WORK LISTSBEST MBA PROGRAMSMORE RANKINGSFortune Company ListAnalyticsNewslettersMagazineDecember 2023/January 2024October/November 2023August/September 2023June/July 2023April/May 2023February/March 2023Live MediaCEO InitiativeCommentary·HealthBird flu outbreak at Colorado farm as 5 workers reported positive: Experts warn of ‘turning point,’ call for urgent actionBYCarolyn BarberCarolyn Barber, M.D., is an internationally published science and medical writer and a 25-year emergency physician. She is the author of the book Runaway Medicine: What You Don’t Know May Kill You, and the co-founder of the California-based homeless work program Wheels of Change.Farmworkers are considered to be on the front lines of risk because of their proximity to both chickens and dairy cattle, two species in which H5N1 has already been found in alarming numbers in the U.S.Brandon Bell—Getty ImagesFor months, fearing that the current version of bird flu had a much higher chance of spreading to humans than previous iterations, experts have pushed for a more aggressive response from U.S. health agencies to reduce human exposure and prevent a potential pandemic. The urgency of those requests is about to rise. Late on Sunday, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment reported that five people have tested positive for bird flu among workers at an egg farm in Weld County, Colorado. Four of those cases have been confirmed by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC), and one test is pending confirmation. The cases emanated from a major flu outbreak at the farm, which affected nearly 1.8 million chickens. The workers were in the process of destroying those chickens, a process known as culling. Colorado’s governor has declared a disaster emergency in response to the outbreak, and the announcement by state health officials of the positive cases represents a grim landmark. It denotes the first time a cluster of human infection has been reported on a single farm in the U.S., and it again raises the stakes on the seriousness of this virus. A turning point State health officials said the workers exhibited mild symptoms, including conjunctivitis (pink eye) and respiratory issues, and no one was hospitalized. But the incident marks the kind of turning point that experts have worried over for some time. “I am extremely concerned that we are on the brink of this being really already in humans—and once it’s in humans, it is going to be a real problem to control,” says Seema Lakdawala, a microbiologist and immunologist at Emory University who specializes in influenza. “I will tell you that what has been driving me the past few months is trying to prevent H5 from becoming a pandemic…I have never felt that we were as close as we are now.” In its own way, the CDC echoes that concern, referencing in general terms the “pandemic potential” of H5N1 and other novel flu viruses once humans are in the mix. But the agency added that it hasn’t yet seen genetic changes in the virus that would make human transmission more likely, and it continues to judge the risk to the general public as low. Farmworkers on the front lines This basic concern—a virus that already has shown the ability to adapt to multiple animal species, now jumping to humans—is what prompted experts and researchers to begin clamoring for more testing of both animals and workers on farms, including blood tests, as well as for vaccinations and antivirals at the ready. They also want farmworkers to be educated about the importance of wearing personal protective equipment–and for the CDC, USDA, and other health agencies, especially those at the state level, to step up the urgency. Farmworkers are considered to be on the front lines of risk because of their proximity to both chickens and dairy cattle, two species in which H5N1 has already been found in alarming numbers in the U.S.—and that is with limited testing of both animals and those who work near them. The key, experts say, is to broaden testing practices now, not later. Waiting for more clusters of infection to appear, they say, is an open invitation to mass spread. “I’d like to see them swabbing from not just the symptomatic people that they’ve talked about, but also asymptomatic people on the same farm in the family circle unit and in the community,” says immunologist Rick Bright, a former federal health official. “And I’d like to see them taking blood samples for serology testing.” Serologic testing could help to identify people who have been infected and had either mild or asymptomatic H5N1 disease that investigators may be missing. If the testing came back positive for a family member of an infected worker, for example, it could be indicative of human-to-human transmission. “And, that’s really important to see,” says Bright. The CDC’s release on the events included the news that the agency was sending a team to assist Colorado’s investigation “at the state’s request.” The wording was noteworthy. Despite the national implications of a virus spreading from animal to human, and potentially from human to human (there is no evidence of that yet), the CDC still has to be invited to participate in any single state’s investigation of the problem. Individual farms cannot be forced by the federal agency to test either animals or workers. Such authority resides with state and sometimes county or local agencies, and researchers say past experience suggests that many farms will be reluctant to a testing process that could lead to their shutdown or loss of their workforce. But there are other issues that cry out for quick resolution. One of them, experts say, is a horrible lag time in reporting the results of testing by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or USDA. “We have not seen increased transparency from the USDA,” says Bright. “Last week they dumped about 80 viruses into the database, and when you look at those 80 viruses, they were a bunch of viruses collected from birds. The samples were collected throughout 2023 and into early 2024. It’s ridiculous…By not being transparent and timely with their data, the USDA is really forcing a lot of guesswork.” Bright wants to see the most recent few weeks of virus sequences from cows, cats, mice, and humans, in order to understand if the virus is changing in ways that may make it easier to spread or cause more severe disease in people. “And we need them to be uncloaked to be able to determine where and when the blood samples were collected,” the immunologist says. Even given the problems of coordinating federal, state, and local agencies, the lack of testing on humans in the U.S. is glaring. According to the CDC, barely more than 60 people have been tested for the novel bird flu virus since farm outbreaks began this spring. This testing often involves eye, nose or throat swabs to look for active infection, but does not include blood draws which would be needed for serosurveillance. “There are barriers for our public health agencies to achieve this, but it would certainly be valuable to have more widespread testing,” says Emory virologist and influenza expert Anice Lowen. Lowen counts farm, dairy, and poultry workers with potential exposure among those in need of testing. “We really do not have a good idea how much spillover is happening,” the virologist says. “The handful of cases that have been documented are potentially the tip of the iceberg, but we just don’t know because there’s not enough testing going on.” Bright is among those calling for the CDC to make vaccines available now to farmworkers and others at high risk of contracting bird flu, arguing that it is unethical to do anything less. Though it’s clear that the U.S. lacks the stockpile to effectively vaccinate the full population in the case of a mass outbreak, there is more than enough to begin with those on the front lines. “There’s no such thing as just a little conjunctivitis. or just a little respiratory (issue) when you’re dealing with a deadly virus,” Bright says. The virus, he adds, has already demonstrated the ability to mutate “very easily, very quickly, and it can cause severe illness and death. So let’s stop it in its tracks, not wait and see and let it get worse.” Whether the CDC will follow the experts’ suggestions remains an open question. The agency’s response so far has been muted, with no change in official recommendation. For those who’ve been closely tracking this bird flu, though, the signs are ominous, and they warrant a proactive response-including vaccination of frontline farmworkers. “That’s why we have these stockpiles,” Seema Lackdawala says. “It’s surprising to me that they haven’t been leveraged…We always expected this at some point in time.” More must-read commentary published by Fortune: How U.S.-China competition is benefiting the world—and reshaping the global economy ‘A head-in-the-sand approach’: The U.S. strategic drug stockpile is inadequate for a bird flu outbreak Gen Z’s enthusiasm for all things touchable is resurrecting the analog economy—and costing parents Fearless Fund counsel: The court ruling barring grants to Black women entrepreneurs should terrify CEOs The opinions expressed in Fortune.com commentary pieces are solely the views of their authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions and beliefs of Fortune.A newsletter for the boldest, brightest leaders: CEO Daily is your weekday morning dossier on the news, trends, and chatter business leaders need to know. Sign up here.Latest in Commentary0 minutes agoPartner Commentary - A.I.CFOs are tackling hard truths in the generative AI eraBYSpencer Lin and Monica Proothi0 minutes agoCommentary - politicsDemocrats should have celebrated America’s stunning economic success–but they were intimidated by progressivesBYJeffrey Sonnenfeld0 minutes agoCommentary - careersAmerica solved veterans’ unemployment within a decade—but ‘underemployment’ continues to hold back their talentsBYJonathan Due0 minutes agoCommentary - politicsHow the Democratic Party lost American workers: It’s the minimum wage, stupidBYJohn Driscoll0 minutes agoCommentary - leadershipIn the wake of an election that divided the workplace, CEOs must inspire unityBYAlan Fleischmann0 minutes agoCommentary - U.S. Presidential ElectionWhy Indian-Americans are breaking from the DemocratsBYVivek WadhwaMost Popular0 minutes agoFinanceExpect a ‘huge sucking sound’ of foreign capital flooding in as U.S. dominance of global finance increases, top economist saysBYJason Ma0 minutes agoRetailHere’s what’s open (and closed) on Veterans Day 2024BYChris Morris0 minutes agoConferencesFormer Secretary of State Mike Pompeo says Trump won’t let Putin ‘roll through Ukraine’BYPaolo Confino0 minutes agoTechElon Musk’s Trump bet has paid off so well that Tesla is now worth more than most of the rest of the car industry combinedBYChristiaan Hetzner0 minutes agoFinanceHedge funds shorting Tesla just lost more than $5 billionBYIshika Mookerjee and Bloomberg0 minutes agoPoliticsTrump demands Senate let him appoint cabinet nominees without a vote, bypassing confirmation processBYMary Clare Jalonick, Adriana Gomez Licon, and othersRankings100 Best CompaniesFortune 500Global 500Fortune 500 EuropeMost Powerful WomenFuture 50World’s Most Admired CompaniesSee All RankingsSectionsFinanceLeadershipSuccessTechAsiaEuropeEnvironmentFortune CryptoHealthWellRetailLifestylePoliticsNewslettersMagazineFeaturesCommentaryMPWCEO InitiativeConferencesPersonal FinanceRecommendsCustomer SupportFrequently Asked QuestionsCustomer Service PortalPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseSingle Issues for PurchaseInternational PrintCommercial ServicesFortune Brand StudioFortune AnalyticsFortune ConferencesAdvertisingBusiness DevelopmentAbout UsAbout UsEditorial CalendarPress CenterWork at FortuneDiversity and InclusionTerms and ConditionsSite Map© 2024 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy | CA Notice at Collection and Privacy Notice | Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information FORTUNE is a trademark of Fortune Media IP Limited, registered in the U.S. and other countries. FORTUNE may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.Avian Influenza H5N1 cases confirmed in Colorado poultry workers Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Spain Indonesia Search Register Login Search TECHNICAL ARTICLES MONOGRAPHICS Species REPORTAGE INTERVIEWS SECTORIAL NEWS Authors BUSINESS DIRECTORY PRODUCT GUIDES REGISTRATION/LOGIN AVINEWS MAGAZINE PRINTED SUBSCRIPTION AGRIFM - PODCAST AGRI - CALENDAR AGRINEWS CAMPUS REGIONS Spain Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Indonesia Magazine Feeding and nutrition of layers Themes Species Interviews Sectorial Authors Companies Product Events RECOMMENDED Alternative production Animal Nutrition AviNews aviNews Biosecurity Equipment Events Genetics 2024 PSA Annual Meeting 41st Saudi Agriculture 2024 Additives aditives alpacas Alphitobius diaperinus Amino acids aMPV Animal welfare Antibiotic-free poultry Artificial Intelligence Ascaridia galli READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER OTHER EDITIONS 18 Jul 2024 Avian Influenza H5N1 cases confirmed in Colorado poultry workers Health officials in Colorado have confirmed a total of five human cases of avian influenza (H5N1) in workers who responded to an outbreak at a commercial egg layer operation. PDF FILE Health officials in Colorado have confirmed a total of five human cases of avian influenza (H5N1) in workers who responded to an outbreak at a commercial egg layer operation. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has verified four of these cases, while one additional case is presumptive positive and pending confirmation. Outbreak details The affected workers were involved in culling poultry at a farm in northeast Colorado. Despite exhibiting mild symptoms, including conjunctivitis (commonly known as pink eye) and respiratory infection symptoms, none of the individuals required hospitalization. These recent cases in Colorado have sparked considerable concern among health officials. The five individuals, whose identities have not been disclosed for privacy reasons, are believed to have contracted the virus through direct contact with infected poultry. According to the CDC, these cases were identified through routine surveillance and testing of individuals exposed to potentially infected birds. Coordination and investigation Dr. Rochelle Walensky, Director of the CDC, emphasized the importance of early detection and response in containing the virus. "Our priority is to ensure the health and safety of the public," she stated in a press briefing. "We are working closely with state and local health departments to identify the source of the infection and prevent further spread." The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) collaborated with the Colorado Department of Agriculture, the State Emergency Operations Center, and the CDC to investigate the outbreak. The investigation is ongoing, with continued support from the CDC.Continue after advertising. Safe consumption of poultry products Health authorities emphasize that it is safe to consume properly handled and cooked poultry products. Adequate cooking kills bacteria and viruses, including avian flu viruses. If you work with dairy cows or poultry and experience flu-like symptoms, seek medical care promptly. Global Implications The cases in Colorado are a stark reminder of the ongoing threat posed by avian influenza. While the current risk to the general public remains low, the potential for the virus to mutate and gain the ability to spread more easily among humans is a significant concern. This scenario could lead to a global pandemic with devastating consequences. The WHO and other international health agencies are closely monitoring the situation in Colorado and are prepared to provide support if needed. Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the WHO, reiterated the importance of global cooperation in addressing zoonotic diseases. "No country can tackle these threats alone," he said. "We must work together to strengthen our surveillance, research, and response capabilities to prevent future outbreaks." Conclusion The identification of H5N1 cases in Colorado serves as a critical reminder of the ever-present threat posed by zoonotic diseases. The CDC's swift action in investigating and containing these cases is a testament to the robust public health infrastructure in place, but continued efforts are needed to safeguard against future outbreaks. As we navigate these challenges, global cooperation and investment in public health will be essential in building a safer, healthier future for all. Sources: Available upon request PDF FILE Related to Biosecurity 04 Nov Backyard pig infected with H5N1 virus in the U.S. 30 Oct France is scared by Salmonella and recalls 3 million eggs 10 Sep AI H5N1 in the U.S.: 13 human cases in poultry workers since April 04 Sep Biosecurity Compliance: The Balance Between Culture, Personality, Experience, Education and Technology 30 Aug SENASICA successfully eradicates H5N1 AI outbreak in Mexico MAGAZINE AVINEWS INTERNATIONAL Subscribe now to the poultry technical magazine OTHER EDITIONS READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER AUTHORS Zoetis Technical Team FOLLOW H&N Technical Team FOLLOW Brian Fairchild FOLLOW Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon FOLLOW Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan FOLLOW Guillermo Tellez FOLLOW Ken Bafundo FOLLOW Güner GÖVENÇ FOLLOW Nestor Ledesma Martínez FOLLOW Dra. Elein Hernández FOLLOW Talha Siddique FOLLOW EDITION AviNews International September 2024 In ovo vaccination with Embrex® technology helps support earlier, more robust immune response in chicks Zoetis Technical Team Egg Size H&N Technical Team Brian Fairchild Interview Brian Fairchild High Oleic Soybeans and their Impact on Egg and Poultry Meat Quality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Metapneumovirus Epidemiology and Seasonality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Controlling Insects in Poultry Production Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan Effects of Chronic Stress and Intestinal Inflammation on Commercial Poultry Health and Performance: Part I Guillermo Tellez Applications of Saponins in Poultry Production Ken Bafundo The Quality Parameters of Soybean and Alternative Protein Feedstuffs in Poultry Nutrition Güner GÖVENÇ Pathology of the Immune System in the Diagnosis of Immunosuppression in Poultry Nestor Ledesma Martínez Animal Welfare and Artificial Intelligence: A Combination of the Poultry Present or Future? Dra. Elein Hernández Advancing Poultry Health: The Role of Predictive Analytics in Disease Prevention Talha Siddique Biosecurity Compliance: The Balance Between Culture, Personality, Experience, Education and Technology Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon SUMMARY Subscribe now to aviNews magazine SEE MORE OTHER EDITIONS JOIN OUR POULTRY COMMUNITY Access the PDF articles Keep up to date with our newsletters Receive the magazine for free in digital version REGISTER DISCOVER LEGAL Privacy policy Cookies policy Más información sobre las cookies OUR MEDIA aviNews Magazine Other Media JOIN Online Register Printed subscriptions Advertise Publish with us Contact FOLLOW US 2024 Copyright Grupo de Comunicación agriNews, SL. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the content of this page in any format or communication, electronic or printed, without express authorization is prohibited.Request authorization. Agencia de Marketing GanaderoIntensive care unit-acquired infections more common in patients with COVID-19 than with influenza | Scientific Reports Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore content About the journal Publish with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature scientific reports articles article Intensive care unit-acquired infections more common in patients with COVID-19 than with influenza Download PDF Download PDF Article Open access Published: 19 July 2024 Intensive care unit-acquired infections more common in patients with COVID-19 than with influenza Josefine Beck-Friis1,2, Magnus Gisslén1,2,3, Staffan Nilsson4, Anna Lindblom1,5, Jonatan Oras6,7 & …Aylin Yilmaz1,2 Show authors Scientific Reports volume 14, Article number: 16655 (2024) Cite this article 1044 Accesses 19 Altmetric Metrics details Subjects Bacterial infectionClinical microbiologyRespiratory distress syndromeViral infection AbstractIntensive care unit-acquired infections are complicating events in critically ill patients. In this study we analyzed the incidence, microbiological patterns, and outcome in patients with COVID-19 versus influenza in the intensive care unit (ICU). We included all adult patients treated with invasive mechanical ventilation due to (1) COVID-19 between January 2020 and March 2022, and (2) influenza between January 2015 and May 2023 at Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Sweden. Of the 480 participants included in the final analysis, 436 had COVID-19. The incidence rates of ICU-acquired infections were 31.6/1000 and 9.9/1000 ICU-days in the COVID-19 and influenza cohorts, respectively. Ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infections were most common in both groups. In patients with COVID-19, corticosteroid treatment was associated with an increased risk of ICU-acquired infections and with higher 90-day mortality in case of infection. Furthermore, ICU-acquired infection was associated with a prolonged time in the ICU, with more difficult-to-treat gram-negative infections in late versus early ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infections. Further research is needed to understand how the association between corticosteroid treatment and incidence and outcome of ICU-acquired infections varies across different patient categories. Similar content being viewed by others Early dexamethasone use as a protective measure in non-mechanically ventilated critically ill patients with COVID-19: a multicenter, cohort study Article Open access 13 June 2022 In-hospital survival of critically ill COVID-19 patients treated with glucocorticoids: a multicenter real-world data study Article Open access 27 May 2024 Treatment of moderate to severe respiratory COVID-19: a cost-utility analysis Article Open access 07 September 2021 IntroductionPatients with viral pneumonia in the intensive care unit (ICU) are at risk of secondary infections that may result in greater length of stay (LoS) and higher morbidity and mortality1,2,3. Intensive care unit-acquired infections (ICU-AI) have been reported in 15–25% of patients admitted to the ICU, with ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) being the most common infection among patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV)4,5. Pre-pandemic studies of VAP have reported the highest prevalence in patients with prior trauma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)6,7. The association between VAP and increased LoS in ICUs and time on IMV is well established, but the correlation with mortality remains controversial8.During the COVID-19 pandemic, approximately 14% of patients hospitalized due to COVID-19 were admitted to intensive care, mainly because of ARDS9. Compared to influenza, patients with COVID-19 had longer ICU LoS and duration of IMV, as well as higher mortality10,11. In June 2020, dexamethasone 6 mg once daily was introduced worldwide as the standard of care for patients with COVID-19-related hypoxia, following positive results on mortality and duration of hospitalization from the RECOVERY trial12. Concerns were soon raised that glucocorticoids could increase the risk of bacterial and fungal infections, although studies showed conflicting results13,14. The association between ICU-AI, glucocorticoids, and ICU outcome remains uncertain2,15,16. Furthermore, the potential differences between ICU-AI in patients with COVID-19 and those with influenza have not been thoroughly explored. In this study, we compared the incidence, microbial patterns, and outcomes of ICU-AI in patients with COVID-19 versus influenza. We also performed an in-depth analysis of the COVID-19 cohort to determine the association between ICU-AI and corticosteroid treatment.MethodsStudy design and participantsWe conducted a retrospective observational cohort study at Sahlgrenska University Hospital (SU) in Gothenburg, Sweden, including all patients 18 years and older on IMV with an International Classification of Diseases 10th Revision (ICD-10) code for COVID-19 between February 2020 and March 2022 (Supplementary Table 1). Patients with an ICD-10 code for influenza were included from January 2015 to May 2023. Exclusion criteria were IMV < 48 h, transfer to/from an ICU outside of SU, or main diagnosis other than either COVID-19 or influenza. Waves of the pandemic were determined by each increase in the number of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 at SU (Wave 1: 1 Feb 2020–27 Sep 2020, Wave 2: 28 Sep 2020–31 Jan 2021, Wave 3: 1 Feb 2021–7 Nov 2021, and Wave 4: 8 Nov 2021–31 Mar 2022; Supplementary Fig. 1). All research was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and relevant guidelines. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (IRB number registration number 2020-01771 and 2022-00653-02), which waived the requirement for informed consent due to the observational nature of the study.Data collectionData regarding patient demographics, co-infections, simplified acute physiology score III (SAPS 3)17, ICU LoS, days on IMV, immunomodulatory and antimicrobial treatment, clinical and biochemical signs of infection (C-reactive protein and white blood cell count) as well as 30- and 90-day mortality were collected from medical charts. A Charlson Comorbidity Index score (CCI) was calculated based on comorbidities recorded in the medical charts18. From the microbiology laboratory at SU, we collected results from blood and lower respiratory tract cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of samples from the lower respiratory tract, and urine antigen tests (Streptococcus pneumoniae and Legionella pneumophila) from hospital admission and up to 48 h after discharge from the ICU.Classification of infections and microbiological findingsDefinitions according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control were used for healthcare-associated infections and significance of microbiological findings19. Multidrug-resistant organisms (MDROs) were classified according to an international expert proposal20 and discussed with a specialist consultant in microbiology (AL) as needed. Several isolates in the same sample were considered as multiple infections, while repeated cultures with the same isolate were considered a single infection, unless there had been a clear clinical improvement and at least seven days between cultures. Candida spp in respiratory samples were considered as colonization. The term ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infection (VA-LRTI) was used instead of VAP due to difficulties with interpreting radiological findings in patients with COVID-19. Considering the generally long ICU LoS among patients with COVID-19, the cut-off between early and late ICU-AI was defined by the median number of days until the first ICU-AI in the COVID-19 cohort, instead of the more common cut-off at five days. Cases that were difficult to define according to the set definitions were discussed among the co-authors.ICU-AIInfection diagnosed ≥ two days after admittance to the ICU or ≤ two days after discharge. Only infections confirmed by microbiological findings and clinical symptoms were included.VA-LRTIPresence of at least one of the following during invasive mechanical ventilation: (a) fever > 38 °C or (b) leukopenia (< 4000 WBC/mm3) or leukocytosis (> 12, 000 WBC/mm3) and at least two of the following: (c) new onset of or change in purulent sputum, (d) cough or dyspnea or tachypnea, (e) suggestive auscultation, or (f) worsening gas exchange and one of the following microbiological findings: (g) positive quantitative culture from bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), protected-brush, or endotracheal aspirate, (h) positive sputum or non-quantitative lower respiratory tract specimen culture, or (i) alternative microbiological tests (PCR test, urine antigen test for Legionella pneumophila or Streptococcus pneumoniae).Blood stream infection (BSI)One positive blood culture of a recognized pathogen or a combination of clinical symptoms (fever > 38 °C, chills, and/or hypotension) and two positive blood cultures of a common skin contaminant from two separate blood samples drawn within 48 h.Co-infectionBacterial infection diagnosed with clinical signs and microbiological findings < 48 h after admittance to the ICU.Statistical analysisDescriptive data were reported as frequencies and percentages for categorical variables and as median and ranges for continuous variables. For comparison between groups, Fisher’s exact test was used for categorical data and the Mann–Whitney U test for continuous variables. ANOVA, Pearson’s chi-squared, and Kruskal–Wallis tests were used as appropriate for comparisons between three or more groups. A P-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Ventilator-free day was defined as the number of days the patient was alive and free of mechanical ventilation after being intubated. We set the time frame at 28 days, thus giving the patient a value of 0 if they died before day 28 or were still receiving mechanical ventilation at day 28. The incidence rates of first ICU-AI were calculated by dividing the number of cases with their first ICU-AI with days at risk (all days in the ICU for patients with no ICU-AI, added to all days in the ICU until the first ICU-AI for the remaining patients) × 1000 days. For patients for whom the date of ICU-AI was missing, the days at risk were calculated as ICU LoS divided by two. For incidence rates of first VA-LRTI, the days at risk consisted of all days on IMV for patients without VA-LRTI added to all days on IMV until the first VA-LRTI for the remaining patients. Poisson 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated for incidence rates and compared using chi-square statistic.The cumulative incidence of ICU-AI with and without corticosteroid treatment was calculated and displayed using a Fine-Gray model, considering discharge from ICU or death as competing events. Sub-hazard ratios were calculated using the same model, adjusting for confounders (age, sex, immunosuppressive treatment at baseline, SAPS 3, and CCI score) in order to identify factors associated with ICU-AI. Hazard ratios for 90-day mortality, adjusted for age, sex, SAPS 3, and CCI score, were calculated using Cox regression with ICU-AI as a time-dependent covariate. Analysis and graphical figures were computed using Microsoft Excel version 16.77, IBM SPSS Statistics version 29.0.0.0, R version 4.2.2, Affinity Designer 2 version 2.2.0, and GraphPad Prism version 10.0.3.ResultsStudy populationWe identified 576 patients with COVID-19 on IMV in five different ICUs at SU during the study period (Fig. 1). After exclusion of patients who did not fulfill the inclusion criteria, 436 individuals remained in the COVID-19 cohort. Of these, 160 were admitted in Wave one, 112 in Wave two, 144 in Wave three, and 20 in Wave four. In the final analysis, 44 patients with influenza were included in the comparison group, of which 31 (70%) had influenza A. Five cases with influenza occurred towards the end of or after the pandemic (2022–2023), and the rest before the COVID-19 pandemic in Sweden. Median age in both cohorts was 63 years (range 20–90; Table 1). The groups were comparable with regard to comorbidities and previous immunosuppressive therapy. There were more males than females in the COVID-19 cohort. Patients with influenza had more severe illness at the time of admission with a higher SAPS 3 and more co-infections.Figure 1Flowchart showing the number of included and excluded patients in the study. Patients were stratified into two major cohorts (COVID-19 and Influenza) and two subgroups in each major cohort (ICU-AI and no ICU-AI). ICU Intensive care unit, ICU-AI ICU-Acquired Infection, IMV Invasive mechanical ventilation, SU Sahlgrenska University Hospital.Full size imageTable 1 Baseline Characteristics of Patients on Invasive Mechanical Ventilation.Full size tableIncidence of ICU-AIAt least one ICU-AI occurred in 192 patients (44%) with COVID-19 and in 7 (16%) with influenza (P < 0.001; Table 2). Incidence rates of first ICU-AI/1000 ICU-days were 31.6 (95% CI 27.3–36.4) and 9.9 (95% CI 4.0–20.5) for COVID-19 and influenza, respectively (P = 0.002). The difference in incidence rates remained similar when comparing only patients without corticosteroid treatment (22.3 vs 5.6, P = 0.026). Incidence rates of first VA-LRTI/1000 ventilator-days were 25.7 (95% CI 21.7–30.1) for COVID-19 and 8.3 (95% CI 2.7–19.4) for influenza (P = 0.009). The incidence in the COVID-19 cohort increased in subsequent waves in comparison to the first wave (Supplementary Table 2). There was no significant difference in the incidence of ICU-AI among patients with influenza before and after the COVID-19 pandemic (20% vs 15%, P = 0.75). BSI occurred in 77 patients (18%) with COVID-19 and in 3 (7%) with influenza.Table 2 Treatment and Outcome in the Intensive Care Unit.Full size tableTreatment and outcomeThere were no significant differences in mortality or ICU LoS between the COVID-19 and influenza cohorts (Table 2). Median number of days until first ICU-AI was 9 (range 2–56) in the COVID-19 cohort and 7 (range 7–48) in the influenza cohort (P = 0.86). VA-LRTI occurred within five days of admission the ICU in 29 patients (19%) with COVID-19 and one (20%) with influenza. The first dose of antibiotics was given within 48 h of ICU admission.to 92% of patients with COVID-19 and to 95% with influenza. For patients in the COVID-19 cohort, this number was similar throughout all four waves (Supplementary Table 2).Cefotaxime was the first antibiotic administered to 80% of patients with COVID-19, whereas 16% received piperacillinazobactam. The ratio between the administration of cefotaxime and piperacillinazobactam decreased throughout the pandemic. In patients with influenza, 36% received cefotaxime and piperacillinazobactam respectively, and 18% meropenem. Erythromycin was co-administered to 48% of the patients with influenza, but only to 1% of patients with COVID-19.Anti-inflammatory treatment, predominantly corticosteroids, was given to 299 patients (69%) with COVID-19 and 24 (55%) with influenza (Table 2). In the first wave, corticosteroids were given to 21% of patients with COVID-19, and to > 90% in subsequent waves. The majority of the patients with COVID-19 received corticosteroids according to Swedish recommendations (betamethasone 6 mg once daily for 10 days) but a few patients may have been given a prolonged treatment. The type of corticosteroids, dose, and duration of treatment varied greatly among patients with influenza. While the indication for corticosteroids was respiratory failure and/or ARDS in only four patients in this cohort, the main indication was airway obstruction (14/24) and in three cases septic shock.ICU-AI in the COVID-19 cohortPatients with ICU-AI remained in the ICU for a median 15 days longer (P < 0.001) and had a higher 90-day mortality (P = 0.045; Table 3). When considering ICU-AI as a time-dependent variable and stratifying for corticosteroid treatment, the adjusted hazard ratios for 90-day mortality were 1.81 (95% CI 1.16–2.84) for patients with corticosteroid treatment, and 0.68 (95% CI 0.33–1.37) for patients without corticosteroids. The cumulative incidence of ICU-AI was higher in the group with corticosteroid treatment in a competing event analysis (Fig. 2). Adjusted sub-hazard ratios for ICU-AI were 2.18 (95% CI 1.54–3.09; P < 0.001) with corticosteroid treatment, and 1.72 (95% CI 1.18–2.56; P = 0.006) for male gender. There was no significant difference in the median age when comparing patients with or without ICU-AI, and with or without corticosteroids (P = 0.008). A comparison of patients within the influenza cohort confirmed the longer ICU LoS and time on IMV in case of ICU-AI (Supplementary Table 3).Table 3 Subgroup Analysis of Patients on Invasive Mechanical Ventilation due to COVID-19.Full size tableFigure 2Cumulative incidence of intensive care unit-acquired infections in patients with and without corticosteroid treatment from a competing events analysis using Fine and Gray model with discharge from intensive care or death as competing events. P < 0.001. ICU-AI ICU-Acquired Infection.Full size imageMicrobiological findingsThe majority of VA-LRTI (N = 138, 66%) in the COVID-19 cohort were caused by gram-negative bacteria, compared to 28% (N = 2) for patients with influenza (Fig. 3). In the COVID-19 cohort, gram-negative bacteria were more common in late compared to early VA-LRTI (75% versus 56%; Supplementary Table 4). The most notable increases between early and late infection were seen in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (7% to 15%) and Stenotrophomonas maltophila (1% to 11%).Figure 3Microbiological findings in intensive care unit-acquired infections. (A,B) Microbes associated with ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infections in the COVID-19 (A) and influenza (B) cohorts. (C,D) Microbes associated with bloodstream infections in the COVID-19 (C) and influenza (D) cohorts. Each microbe was only counted once per patient and infection and presented as number (n) and percentage (%). Gram-positive bacteria are marked with stripes. All were culture positive, none of the microbes were identified through alternative methods (PCR-test or urine-antigen test) only. C. albicans Candida albicans, E. coli Escherichia coli, E. faecium Enterococcus faecium, E. faecalis Enterococcus faecalis, P. aeruginosa Pseudomonas aeruginosa, S. aureus Staphylococcus aureus, S. maltophila Stenotrophomonas maltophila, spp species.Full size imageSixty-five BSIs in the COVID-19 group were caused by gram-positive bacteria, 18 by gram-negative bacteria, and 11 by Candida spp. All BSIs in the influenza cohort were caused by either gram-positive bacteria (3 of 4) or Candida albicans (1 of 4). Of all patients with an ICU-AI in the COVID-19 cohort, 28 (15%) had an MDRO, of which 22 (79%) were gram-negative bacteria. None of the infections in the influenza group were caused by an MDRO. (All the blood and lower respiratory tract cultures reviewed in the study are presented in Supplementary Table 5).DiscussionIn this Swedish retrospective cohort study, mechanically ventilated patients with COVID-19 experienced a higher incidence of ICU-acquired infections compared to those with influenza. Staphylococcus aureus was identified as the most common pathogen causing VA-LRTI among patients with influenza and COVID-19, while gram-negative bacteria as a group caused the majority of VA-LRTI in patients with COVID-19. We found an association between ICU-AI and increased risk of mortality in patients treated with corticosteroids. Our data further suggest that corticosteroid treatment in COVID-19 is a risk factor for acquiring secondary bacterial infections in the ICU.The differing risk of ICU-AI in patients with COVID-19 as opposed to influenza accords with other studies2,11,21,22,23,24. It may be explained by factors such as increased demand on the healthcare system during the COVID-19 pandemic11,25, alterations of immune responses caused by SARS-CoV-221, a high proportion of ARDS in COVID-19, more frequent prone positioning23, and prolonged IMV and ICU stays11,26. Although we noted no difference in ICU LoS between the COVID-19 and influenza cohorts, there was a small difference in time on IMV. Consistent with findings from other studies23,26, more males were observed in critical COVID-19 cases than in influenza cases. This may account for the different incidence rates, as this and other studies suggest that male gender is a risk factor for ICU-AI15,27.There was no significant difference in the percentage of patients with corticosteroid treatment between the two cohorts. However, the indication for corticosteroid treatment to patients with influenza was airway obstruction and/or sepsis with lower doses and shorter duration than recommended in severe COVID-19. Furthermore, antibiotic treatment on admission has been shown to be a risk factor for ICU-AI2,28,29, and early initiation of antibiotics was high throughout the pandemic, despite the low frequency of co-infections on admission in patients with COVID-19. On the other hand, it is possible that the lower incidence of ICU-AI in the influenza cohort is partly explained by earlier diagnosis and targeted treatment of co-infection, while some co-infections in the COVID-19 cohort might been missed initially and later misinterpreted as ICU-AI.As the pandemic developed, incidence rates of ICU-AI in patients with COVID-19 increased. A similar pattern, but with slightly lower incidence rates, was seen in a recent Swedish study on VA-LRTI29. The differing incidence rates of ICU-AI during the pandemic can be partly explained by a shift in corticosteroid treatment, for as our study and several others have suggested, corticosteroid treatment is a risk factor for ICU-AI2,15,22,29,30. Moreover, later in the pandemic patients were more critically ill and had more co-infections on admission, possibly affecting the risk of ICU-AI. Nor can we rule out other variables, such as changes in management or staffing at the ICU31, different SARS-CoV-2 strains, or vaccinations32, any of which may have affected the risk of ICU-AI throughout the pandemic.Other studies have demonstrated the same association between ICU LoS and IMV duration, while reports on mortality are conflicting15,24,29,30,33. Our findings demonstrate an increased risk of mortality with ICU-AI in patients with corticosteroid treatment as compared to patients who have not received corticosteroids. This may in part reflect the higher mortality that occurred in later waves in contrast to the first. Although glucocorticoids have been shown to reduce mortality12,34, later studies have indicated that not all patients with severe COVID-19 may benefit from corticosteroid treatment15,35,36. We did not find any interaction between age and corticosteroid treatment on the risk of ICU-AI, but it cannot be ruled out that certain patient categories might be affected differently by corticosteroid treatment. Further risk–benefit studies of the association between corticosteroid treatment, ICU-AI, and outcome in hospitalized patients are needed.The microbial pattern we observed in VA-LRTI is consistent with that seen elsewhere11,14,22,29,30. Although we found a larger discrepancy between the two cohorts than other studies observed11,23,24,37, this may have been due to the small number of patients with influenza and ICU-AI. A shift in the microbial pattern was observed between early and late VA-LRTI, with an increase in more difficult-to-treat microbes in later stages, consistent with findings reported in other studies11,29,30. Possible explanations for this are alterations in lung microbiota38, increase of biofilm-active bacteria39, as well as an overuse of antibiotics2. We noted a change throughout the pandemic towards more broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment on admission in patients with COVID-19. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are a risk factor for ICU-AI28 and may possibly facilitate the development of more complicated infections. Although the rate of MDRO was comparatively low23,40, there is a risk of decreasing antibiotic susceptibility with the overuse of antibiotics41,42.The major strengths of our study are the large sample size of patients on IMV due to COVID-19 and our detailed examination of the medical charts for each case. There are however some important limitations to consider: First, the retrospective nature of the study. Second, the small comparison group, due to the relatively few patients on IMV as a result of influenza, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. The inclusion period for the two cohorts also differed somewhat, possibly affecting the prevalence of MDRO. Third, most patients receiving corticosteroid treatment were hospitalized after the first wave, so it is possible that there were coinciding changes in management that further affected the risk of ICU-AI. Fourth, most samples from the lower respiratory tract were not taken with protected brush. This may have resulted in some colonization cultures and contaminations being included for analysis.ConclusionSecondary infections among ICU patients with COVID-19 are a common complication associated with a more complex course of disease. Their high incidence rates during the COVID-19 pandemic may partly be due to frequent corticosteroid treatment. Given the increased use of corticosteroids for severe viral and bacterial pneumonia, their impact on ICU-AI merits further evaluation. Data availability The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. AbbreviationsARDS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome BAL: Bronchoalveolar lavage BSI: Blood stream infection CCI: Charlson Comorbidity Index score CI: Confidence intervals ICD-10: International Classification of Diseases 10th Revision ICU: Intensive care unit ICU-AI: Intensive care unit-acquired infection IL6: Interleukin 6 IMV: Invasive mechanical ventilation JAK: Janus Kinase LoS: Length of stay MDRO: Multidrug-resistant organisms PCR: Polymerase chain reaction SAPS 3: Simplified acute physiology score III SU: Sahlgrenska University Hospital VA-LRTI: Ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infection VAP: Ventilator-associated pneumonia ReferencesNseir, S. et al. Relationship between ventilator-associated pneumonia and mortality in COVID-19 patients: A planned ancillary analysis of the coVAPid cohort. Crit. Care 25, 177. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-021-03588-4 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Conway Morris, A. et al. Co-infection and ICU-acquired infection in COIVD-19 ICU patients: A secondary analysis of the UNITE-COVID data set. Crit. Care 26, 236. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-022-04108-8 (2022).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Llitjos, J.-F. et al. Pulmonary infections prime the development of subsequent ICU-acquired pneumonia in septic shock. Ann. Intensive Care 9, 39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13613-019-0515-x (2019).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Legras, A. et al. Nosocomial infections: Prospective survey of incidence in five French intensive care units. Intensive Care Med. 24, 1040–1046. https://doi.org/10.1007/s001340050713 (1998).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Ylipalosaari, P., Ala-Kokko, T. I., Laurila, J., Ohtonen, P. & Syrjälä, H. Epidemiology of intensive care unit (ICU)-acquired infections in a 14-month prospective cohort study in a single mixed Scandinavian university hospital ICU. Acta Anaesthesiol. Scand. 50, 1192–1197. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-6576.2006.01135.x (2006).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Hyllienmark, P., Gårdlund, B., Persson, J. O. & Ekdahl, K. Nosocomial pneumonia in the ICU: A prospective cohort study. Scand. J. Infect. Dis. 39, 676–682. https://doi.org/10.1080/00365540701225728 (2007).Article PubMed Google Scholar Koulenti, D., Tsigou, E. & Rello, J. Nosocomial pneumonia in 27 ICUs in Europe: Perspectives from the EU-VAP/CAP study. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 36, 1999–2006. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-016-2703-z (2017).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Papazian, L., Klompas, M. & Luyt, C. E. Ventilator-associated pneumonia in adults: A narrative review. Intensive Care Med. 46, 888–906. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-020-05980-0 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Stralin, K. et al. Mortality trends among hospitalised COVID-19 patients in Sweden: A nationwide observational cohort study. Lancet Reg. Health Eur. 4, 100054. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lanepe.2021.100054 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar López Montesinos, I. et al. Comparison of hospitalized coronavirus disease 2019 and influenza patients requiring supplemental oxygen in a cohort study: Clinical impact and resource consumption. Clin. Infect. Dis. 75, 2225–2238. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac314 (2022).Article PubMed Google Scholar Hedberg, P. et al. Ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract bacterial infections in COVID-19 compared with non-COVID-19 patients. Crit. Care Med. 50, 825–836. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000005462 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Recovery Collaborative Group et al. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 693–704. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2021436 (2021).Saura, O. et al. Relationship between corticosteroid use and incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia in COVID-19 patients: A retrospective multicenter study. Crit. Care 26, 292. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-022-04170-2 (2022).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Bardi, T. et al. Nosocomial infections associated to COVID-19 in the intensive care unit: Clinical characteristics and outcome. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 40, 495–502. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-020-04142-w (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Mesland, J. B. et al. Early corticosteroid therapy may increase ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infection in critically ill patients with COVID-19: A multicenter retrospective cohort study. Microorganisms 10, 984. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms10050984 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Gragueb-Chatti, I. et al. Impact of dexamethasone on the incidence of ventilator-associated pneumonia and blood stream infections in COVID-19 patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation: A multicenter retrospective study. Ann. Intensive Care https://doi.org/10.1186/s13613-021-00876-8 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Moreno, R. P. et al. SAPS 3–From evaluation of the patient to evaluation of the intensive care unit. Part 2: Development of a prognostic model for hospital mortality at ICU admission. Intensive Care Med. 31, 1345–1355. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-005-2763-5 (2005).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Quan, H. et al. Coding algorithms for defining comorbidities in ICD-9-CM and ICD-10 administrative data. Med. Care 43, 1130–1139. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mlr.0000182534.19832.83 (2005).Article PubMed Google Scholar ECDC. Surveillance of healthcare-associated infections and prevention indicators in European intensive care units. (Stockholm, 2017).Magiorakos, A. P. et al. Multidrug-resistant, extensively drug-resistant and pandrug-resistant bacteria: An international expert proposal for interim standard definitions for acquired resistance. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18, 268–281. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03570.x (2012).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Povoa, P., Martin-Loeches, I. & Nseir, S. Secondary pneumonias in critically ill patients with COVID-19: Risk factors and outcomes. Curr. Opin. Crit. Care 27, 468–473. https://doi.org/10.1097/MCC.0000000000000860 (2021).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Sovik, S. et al. Corticosteroids and superinfections in COVID-19 patients on invasive mechanical ventilation. J. Infect. 85, 57–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2022.05.015 (2022).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Rouze, A. et al. Relationship between SARS-CoV-2 infection and the incidence of ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infections: A European multicenter cohort study. Intensive Care Med. 47, 188–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-020-06323-9 (2021).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Laurichesse, G. et al. Mortality, incidence, and microbiological documentation of ventilated acquired pneumonia (VAP) in critically ill patients with COVID-19 or influenza. Ann. Intensive Care 13, 108. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13613-023-01207-9 (2023).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Taxbro, K. et al. Factors related to COVID-19 mortality among three Swedish intensive care units-A retrospective study. Acta Anaesthesiol. Scand. 67, 788–796. https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.14232 (2023).Article PubMed Google Scholar Naouri, D. et al. Differences in clinical characteristics and outcomes between COVID-19 and influenza in critically ill adult patients: A national database study. J. Infect. 87, 120–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2023.05.011 (2023).Article PubMed Google Scholar Razazi, K. et al. Risks of ventilator-associated pneumonia and invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in patients with viral acute respiratory distress syndrome related or not to Coronavirus 19 disease. Crit. Care 24, 699. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-020-03417-0 (2020).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Grasselli, G. et al. Hospital-acquired infections in critically ill patients with COVID-19. Chest 160, 454–465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2021.04.002 (2021).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Forsberg, G. et al. Risk factors for ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infection in COVID-19, a retrospective multicenter cohort study in Sweden. Acta Anaesthesiol. Scand. https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.14338 (2023).Article PubMed Google Scholar Garnier, M. et al. Epidemiology, risk factors and prognosis of ventilator-associated pneumonia during severe COVID-19: Multicenter observational study across 149 European intensive care units. Anaesth. Crit. Care Pain Med. 42, 101184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accpm.2022.101184 (2023).Article PubMed Google Scholar Rosenback, R., Lantz, B. & Rosen, P. Hospital Staffing during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Sweden. Healthcare (Basel) 10, 2116. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10102116 (2022).Article PubMed Google Scholar Hedberg, P., Karlsson Valik, J., Abdel Halim, L., Alfvén, T. & Naucler, P. Outcomes of SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant infections compared with seasonal influenza and respiratory syncytial virus infections in adults attending the emergency department: A multicentre cohort study. Clin. Infect. Dis. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciad660 (2023).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Reyes, L. F. et al. Risk factors for developing ventilator-associated lower respiratory tract infection in patients with severe COVID-19: A multinational, multicentre study, prospective, observational study. Sci. Rep. 13, 6553. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32265-5 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Martinez-Guerra, B. A. et al. Outcomes of patients with severe and critical COVID-19 treated with dexamethasone: A prospective cohort study. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 11, 50–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2021.2011619 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Lidou-Renault, V. et al. Corticosteroid therapy in COVID-19 associated with in-hospital mortality in geriatric patients: A propensity matched cohort study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 77, 1352–1360. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/glac084 (2022).Article CAS PubMed Google Scholar Wagner, C. et al. Systemic corticosteroids for the treatment of COVID-19: Equity-related analyses and update on evidence. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 11, CD014963. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD014963.pub2 (2022).Article PubMed Google Scholar Pandey, M. et al. Comparative incidence of early and late bloodstream and respiratory tract co-infection in patients admitted to ICU with COVID-19 pneumonia versus Influenza A or B pneumonia versus no viral pneumonia: Wales multicentre ICU cohort study. Crit. Care 26, 158. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-022-04026-9 (2022).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Ling, L. et al. Characterization of upper airway microbiome across severity of COVID-19 during hospitalization and treatment. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 13, 1205401. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2023.1205401 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Safdar, N., Crnich, C. J. & Maki, D. G. The pathogenesis of ventilator-associated pneumonia: Its relevance to developing effective strategies for prevention. Respir. Care 50, 725–739 (2005).PubMed Google Scholar Langford, B. J. et al. Antimicrobial resistance in patients with COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Microbe 4, e179–e191. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2666-5247(22)00355-X (2023).Article PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar Micheli, G. et al. The hidden cost of COVID-19: Focus on antimicrobial resistance in bloodstream infections. Microorganisms 11, 1299. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11051299 (2023).Article CAS PubMed PubMed Central Google Scholar CDC. COVID-19: U.S. Impact on Antimicrobial Resistance, Special Report 2022. (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, 2022).Download referencesAcknowledgementsWe thank Moa Rehn for help with Supplementary Fig. 1.FundingOpen access funding provided by University of Gothenburg. This work was funded by Göteborgs Läkaresällskap, GLS-972707, Göteborgs Universitet, Västra Götalandsregionen, ALFGBG-965885, ALFGBG-942924, Knut och Alice Wallenbergs Stiftelse, 2020.0182, Vetenskapsrådet, 2021-05045, King Gustaf V’s and Queen Victoria´s Foundation.Author informationAuthors and AffiliationsDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, SwedenJosefine Beck-Friis, Magnus Gisslén, Anna Lindblom & Aylin YilmazDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Region Västra Götaland, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 416 85, Gothenburg, SwedenJosefine Beck-Friis, Magnus Gisslén & Aylin YilmazPublic Health Agency of Sweden, Solna, SwedenMagnus GisslénDepartment of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, SwedenStaffan NilssonDepartment of Clinical Microbiology, Region Västra Götaland, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, SwedenAnna LindblomDepartment of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, SwedenJonatan OrasDepartment of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Region Västra Götaland, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, SwedenJonatan OrasAuthorsJosefine Beck-FriisView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarMagnus GisslénView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarStaffan NilssonView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAnna LindblomView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarJonatan OrasView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarAylin YilmazView author publicationsYou can also search for this author in PubMed Google ScholarContributionsJBF, AY, MG, and JO conceived and designed the paper. The analysis and interpretation of data was done by all authors. Drafting the paper was carried out by JBF. Revising the paper was the responsibility of JBF, AY, MG, and JO. Final approval of the version to be published was given by all authors.Corresponding authorCorrespondence to Josefine Beck-Friis.Ethics declarations Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional informationPublisher's noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.Supplementary InformationSupplementary Information.Rights and permissions Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Reprints and permissionsAbout this articleCite this articleBeck-Friis, J., Gisslén, M., Nilsson, S. et al. Intensive care unit-acquired infections more common in patients with COVID-19 than with influenza. Sci Rep 14, 16655 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-67733-zDownload citationReceived: 16 May 2024Accepted: 15 July 2024Published: 19 July 2024DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-67733-zShare this articleAnyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content:Get shareable linkSorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article.Copy to clipboard Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative KeywordsSARS-CoV-2InfluenzaVentilator-associated pneumoniaGlucocorticoidsBacteriaMortality Download PDF Advertisement Explore content Research articles News & Comment Collections Subjects Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal About Scientific Reports Contact Journal policies Guide to referees Calls for Papers Editor's Choice Journal highlights Open Access Fees and Funding Publish with us For authors Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Scientific Reports (Sci Rep) ISSN 2045-2322 (online) nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Microbiology newsletter — what matters in microbiology research, free to your inbox weekly. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy. Close banner Close Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for Nature Briefing: MicrobiologyH5N1 avian flu could cause a human pandemicThe EconomistThe Economist/>Skip to contentMenuWeekly editionThe world in briefSearchLog inOpinionLeadersLetters to the editorBy InvitationCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceCurrent topicsUS elections 2024War in UkraineWar in the Middle EastThe World Ahead 2024Climate changeCoronavirusThe world economyArtificial intelligenceWorldThe world this weekChinaUnited StatesEuropeBritainMiddle East & AfricaAsiaThe AmericasInternationalA-Z of international relationsA-Z of military termsA-Z of US politicsUS election poll trackerIn depthScience & technologyBriefingGraphic detailThe Economist explainsSpecial reportsTechnology QuarterlyEssaySchools briefBusiness & economicsFinance & economicsBusinessBig Mac indexA-Z of economicsEconomic & financial indicatorsCulture & society1843 magazineCultureObituaryThe Economist readsChristmas SpecialsMorePodcastsNewslettersFilmsThe Economist appSecureDropSubscriber eventsEconomist Education coursesEconomist EnterpriseMy EconomistSaved storiesLog outSaved storiesAccountLog outSearchSearchTry AI-powered searchScience & technology | EpidemiologyH5N1 avian flu could cause a human pandemicExisting immunity and vaccines may soften its severityPhotograph: Getty Images Jul 17th 2024ShareON JULY 14TH America’s Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported five new cases of the H5N1 avian flu virus in humans, bringing the total number of cases reported since April to nine. All five were involved in culling infected poultry in Colorado, and appear to have the same strain that has been spreading in dairy cows across the country since December. So far, there is no evidence the virus has adapted to spread between humans, a prerequisite for a flu pandemic. But things can change quickly—the more the virus circulates in animals that come in close contact with humans, the bigger the risk that a pandemic strain will emerge.This article appeared in the Science & technology section of the print edition under the headline “Betting the farm”Science & technology July 20th 2024H5N1 avian flu could cause a human pandemicAstronomers have found a cave on the moonAI can predict tipping points before they happenFrom the July 20th 2024 editionDiscover stories from this section and more in the list of contentsExplore the editionShareReuse this contentDiscover moreThere’s lots of gold in urban waste dumpsThe pay dirt could be 15 times richer than natural depositsA battle is raging over the definition of open-source AICompanies that bet on the right one could win bigAs wellness trends take off, iodine deficiency makes a quiet comebackLevels of the vital nutrient are falling rapidly in AmericaHow blood-sucking vampire bats get their energyThey pull off a trick previously thought unique to a few insects China plans to crash a spacecraft into a distant asteroidIt will be only the second country to conduct such a planetary defence experimentResearchers are questioning if ADHD should be seen as a disorderIt should, instead, be seen as a different way of being normalSubscribeEconomist EnterpriseReuse our contentHelp and contact usKeep updatedLinkedInFacebookXInstagramThreadsTikTokYouTubeRSSPublished since September 1843 to take part in “a severe contest between intelligence, which presses forward, and an unworthy, timid ignorance obstructing our progress.” The EconomistAboutAdvertisePress centreSecureDropThe Economist GroupThe Economist GroupEconomist IntelligenceEconomist ImpactEconomist Impact EventsWorking hereEconomist Education CoursesExecutive JobsTo enhance your experience and ensure our website runs smoothly, we use cookies and similar technologies.Manage CookiesTerms of UsePrivacyCookie PolicyAccessibilityModern Slavery StatementSitemapYour Data RightsCopyright © The Economist Newspaper Limited 2024. All rights reserved.1.3 million layers in Colorado struck by avian influenza | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseBroilers & TurkeysDiseases & HealthAvian Influenza1.3 million layers in Colorado struck by avian influenzaThis is the second farm in Weld County to be infected in July.Roy GraberJuly 18, 2024Alena Ozihilevich | BigstockAnother commercial laying hen flock in Colorado has been affected by H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) reported that the presence of HPAI was confirmed on July 16 in a flock of 1,313,800 chickens in Weld County.This is the second Weld County egg production flock to be affected by HPAI in July. On July 8, the presence of HPAI was confirmed in another flock, with that one involving 1,790,000 birds, collectively bringing that county’s bird losses beyond 3.1 million.The only other instance of HPAI to be confirmed in a Colorado commercial poultry flock in 2024 involved a flock of 66,500 broiler breeders in Delta County. That case was confirmed on February 8.H5N1 in humans, cattleState and federal health officials are investigating a human outbreak of H5N1, in which four workers responding to an H5N1 avian influenza outbreak in Colorado have confirmed cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) while a fifth worker is a presumed-positive case.According to a press release from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE), the workers were culling poultry at a commercial laying hen operation in the state and exhibited mild symptoms, including conjunctivitis and common respiratory infection symptoms. However, none of the patients required hospitalization.The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the CDPHE did not specifically state that this was a Weld County farm.APHIS has also reported 33 cases of H5N1 in commercial dairy herds in the state. View our continuing coverage of the global avian influenza situation. To learn more about HPAI cases in commercial poultry flocks in the United States, Mexico and Canada, see an interactive map on WATTPoultry.com. RecommendedHatchersGiordano HatchCargoSystem ProLifeLatest NewsNational Turkey Federation offering 'Thanksgiving 101' tips and recipesRelated StoriesAvian InfluenzaH5N1 confirmed in at least 4 poultry workersAvian InfluenzaMinnesota breeder toms struck by avian influenzaAvian InfluenzaAvian flu hits 2 Minnesota turkey breeder hen flocksAvian InfluenzaEurope urged to prepare for next avian flu seasonMore in Avian InfluenzaAvian InfluenzaAvian flu confirmed in poultry flocks in 13 European countriesThe H5N5 variant has been confirmed for the first time at a European poultry farm.Brand InsightsVaccination success depends on crew trainingZoetisContinuous evaluation and training are critical to improving pullet vaccination accuracy.Avian Influenza8 more British Columbia flocks struck by avian fluSo far in 2024, the province has had 22 commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus.Avian InfluenzaLatest Canadian HPAI infections involved variety of speciesOne more flock infection has been reported in Abbotsford, British Columbia.Avian InfluenzaHPAI hits 5 flocks in British Columbia, 1 in CaliforniaAPHIS provides additional information concerning two broiler flocks previously reported as confirmed cases.Avian InfluenzaAustralia commits more funds to H5N1 preparednessAustralian authorities add additional funds to surveillance, biosecurity, vaccines and communications in the face of possible H5N1 incursion.Avian InfluenzaAPHIS updates report on California HPAI casesFlock size numbers for two of four affected operations have been disclosed.Avian InfluenzaMore HPAI reported in California, British Columbia poultryBoth the state and the province have confirmed cases in two commercial flocks.Avian InfluenzaFirst avian flu outbreaks of the season in East AsiaHPAI cases have been reported in poultry and wild birds across Asia from Israel to Japan and South Korea.Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza strikes two California broiler flocksThe number of chickens involved has not yet been disclosed.North AmericaAvian flu infections continue to hit British ColumbiaThe province has had six commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus since October 21.Avian InfluenzaFrance confirms avian flu in vaccinated flocksDucks were found to be positive for the HPAI virus following routine testing, despite them showing no symptoms of the disease.Avian InfluenzaAvian flu hits second broiler flock in California countyThe latest flock infection in Tulare County involved 6,000 broilers.Page 1 of 182Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.Five agricultural workers in northeastern Colorado have now tested positive for bird fluSkip to contentNewsClassicalIndie 102.3KRCCListen LiveNeed help?DonateSearchClose Primary NavigationSearchPoliticsEnvironmentJusticeArtsEconomyEducationDenverSouthern ColoradoAudio & RadioWays to ListenShows and PodcastsCPR News Radio ScheduleCPR ClassicalIndie 102.3NewslettersAll NewslettersThe LookoutDenveriteAbout CPRMission & VisionStaff & HostsCareersStaff DEI ReportRecent AwardsPress RoomContact UsSupport CPRAll the ways to Support!Make a DonationDonate Your CarCorporate SponsorshipCPR ShopClose Primary NavigationPoliticsMoneyArtsJusticeEnvironmentNewsletterSupport CPRFive agricultural workers in northeastern Colorado have now tested positive for bird fluBy John Daley · Jul. 15, 2024, 5:14 pmListen Now7min 37secShare:Charlie Neibergall/AP, FileFILE – Cage-free chickens stand in a fenced pasture on a farm, Oct. 21, 2015. State agencies reported Sunday evening there are now a total of five human cases of avian influenza in people working directly with infected poultry. The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed four and was awaiting test results on a fifth, and is sending a field team to Colorado.The highly pathogenic avian influenza is also called “H5 bird flu.” The infected workers were culling poultry at a commercial egg operation in northeast Colorado. All have had relatively mild symptoms that have not required hospitalization, according to a press release from the state late Sunday. “We (the state health department) and CDC believe that the risk continues to be low here for the general public,” said Dr. Rachel Herlihy, the state epidemiologist with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. “We know that there's going to be increased exposure in certain industries, including the poultry industry and on dairy farms right now.”She said the state had tested 54 workers from a farm where poultry that had tested positive for avian flu were being culled in to stop the virus from spreading. That testing identified the five positive cases. “We want to know if there is any illness among household contacts,” Herlihy said. “That would obviously be a concerning scenario. So the folks that have closest contact with an ill worker would be our highest priority, and that has not been identified to date.” People who are in close contact with the workers who tested positive are being monitored as well. She said the state was making sure the workers have access to PPE, personal protective equipment, like masks and gloves, and that they know the signs and symptoms of avian flu, testing workers and getting treatment to those with symptoms.Herlihy said there has been no sign of the virus spilling over to people via human to human transmission.“We've been tracking this virus since 2022, and during that time we have not seen evidence of person-to-person transmission,” she said.The state is working with the CDC to monitor for any genetic variations that may appear in the virus and any changes in patterns of transmission. “I think we have people on the ground here we're working with to make sure we have a full picture of this particular incident that's occurring at this poultry operation. And so we have lots of questions we want to answer to try and understand the situation,” Herlihy said.The state had already announced three likely cases on Friday; those are now confirmed, as is an additional presumptive case detected late Friday evening, according to the release. Samples for a fifth worker were presumed positive at the state lab on Saturday and will be sent to CDC for confirmation. No additional test results are pending, according to the agencies working on the issue, including the state health department, the Department of Agriculture and Colorado’s Emergency Operations Center.The workers were culling poultry at a farm in northeast Colorado and exhibited mild symptoms. Those included conjunctivitis, also known as pink eye, and what the agencies called ‘common respiratory infection symptoms.’ State epidemiologists suspect the poultry workers’ cases are a result of working directly with infected poultry. The CDC is part of an ongoing investigation. The agency said it had deployed a nine-member field team to Colorado to help the state manage the bird flu outbreak in humans and poultry, according to a statement posted Sunday, July 14 on its website.A team of CDC epidemiologists, veterinarians, clinicians and an industrial hygienist is now working to support Colorado's public health response to the outbreak. This includes ongoing monitoring of workers and testing of additional specimens.“Given current information, CDC believes that the risk to the public from this outbreak remains low,” the statement said. It added these cases underscore “the risk of exposure to infected animals” and that there are no unexpected increases in flu activity in Colorado or other states affected by H5 bird flu outbreaks in cows and poultry.Public health agencies are keeping an eye on the outbreak through a variety of means. Those include looking at hospitalization data, test data from working, emergency department data, and wastewater data. “We have not had any positive detections in wastewater for H5N1 influenza in that northeastern part of the state where we're doing this monitoring,” she said.May Chu, an epidemiologist and clinical professor from the Colorado School of Public Health, said the arrival of a cluster of cases caught her attention, calling the current situation a “worrisome watch.”She said that there was no sign of person to person transmission is promising, but that vigilance is key. Tracking any spread through a variety of means is one way to stay vigilant. But public health mitigations should be amplified if more clusters of cases were to arise here soon.“When it's clustered like that, it tells you that your risk has gone way up because the contact is causing the illness,” she said. “The concentration of persons at one location getting infected tells me the virus is spreading a lot better.” Chu noted infected poultry are culled in order to limit rapid spread through a flock that could then be transmitted to humans. “You can nip it before it gets into the human population widely. That is the best public health protection.”The latest development comes as the state has been dealing with avian flu cases in both poultry and cattle. Earlier this month, the state announced the state’s first human case of avian influenza infection this year. That case originated from a dairy cow, as the virus had put dozens of dairy cattle herds under quarantine due to the virus. “It's disturbing but not surprising that this virus presumptively is spreading to more humans. People who work closely with infected animals are at risk for becoming ill,” said Dr. John Swartzberg, a clinical professor emeritus and expert in infectious diseases, at UC Berkeley, via email Friday.“We have not seen evidence of human-to-human transmission,” he stressed. “If we do, I would be much more concerned.”The state health department wants employees who are working with ill poultry or dairy cattle to be aware of the signs and symptoms, those include pink eye or conjunctivitis, and then other influenza like illness symptoms, like fever, cough, nausea and headaches. Those who develop those symptoms should seek testing and treatment.It is safe to eat properly handled and cooked poultry products, according to the agencies, as high temperatures kill bacteria and viruses. That includes avian flu viruses. Those who work with dairy cows or poultry that may be infected with avian flu are advised to seek medical care if they start to feel sick. They can also call CDPHE at 303-692-2700 during the day, or 303-370-9395 after normal business hours. The agency can assist in getting a flu test and medicine if needed. More information about avian flu in humans is available here.You care.You want to know what is really going on these days, especially in Colorado. We can help you keep up. The Lookout is a free, daily email newsletter with news and happenings from all over Colorado. Sign up here and we will see you in the morning! Popular PostsGovernment and PoliticsThe Colorado Voter’s Guide to the 2024 ElectionGovernment and PoliticsProposition 130: New funding for law enforcement, explained Government and PoliticsProposition 131: All party primaries and ranked-choice voting, explainedMilitaryAmendment K: Modify election deadlines, explainedNewsColorado’s 2024 ballot questions: What passed and what failedLatest Stories2024 ElectionsColorado’s House Speaker and Majority Leader win second term from their Democratic caucusBy Bente Birkeland2024 ElectionsAfter winning a narrow victory, Gabe Evans talks about how he plans to represent Colorado’s 8th District in Congress.By Kiara DeMareNewsListen: How a Denver barbershop keeps people out of prison, one cut at a timeBy Ryan Warner2024 ElectionsColorado Springs Charter ban on recreational pot now failing in latest ballot countBy Andrea ChalfinSign Up For Our Newsletters It takes a good day’s drive to cover Colorado, but we’ll help you do it in a few minutes. Our newsletters bring you a closer look at the stories that affect you and the music that inspires you. Get A Newsletter From The Climate Team Sign Up For The Lookout Sign Up For The Quotie Monthly Get The Inside Track On Denver Music Classical Music Playlists And More Upcoming EventsYouth Documentary Academy World Premiere of New Films3:00pmCornerstone Center for the Arts, Colorado CollegeNov16Indie 102.3’s November Local 303 Meetup feat: May Be Fern6:30pmGlobe HallNov25Save the Date: The 9th Annual Colorado Matters Holiday Extravaganza7:00pmCentral Presbyterian Church DenverDec12 Listen to a Colorado Postcard Colorado Postcards are snapshots of our colorful state in sound. They give brief insights into our people and places, our flora and fauna, and our past and present, from every corner of Colorado. Listen now. News That Matters, Delivered To Your InboxAbout UsOur MissionStaff and HostsCareers at CPRGeneral Contest RulesFCC Applications & FilesContactContact UsMember SupportConnect With CPROpt Out of Targeted AdvertisingListenWays to ListenListening HelpOn-Air ScheduleSupportMake a DonationDonate Your CarBecome a SponsorCorporate SupportersCPR Shop© 2024 Colorado Public Radio. All Rights Reserved. Privacy Policy.0:00/0:00Figure 1 - Proposal for a Global Classification and Nomenclature System for A/H9 Influenza Viruses - Volume 30, Number 8—August 2024 - Emerging Infectious Diseases journal - CDC Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Skip directly to A-Z link Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People A-Z Index × Submit A-Z Index × Submit A-Z Index Search Dropdown × Submit Emerging Infectious Disease journal ISSN: 1080-6059 Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Syndicate Volume 30, Number 8—August 2024 Online Report Proposal for a Global Classification and Nomenclature System for A/H9 Influenza Viruses Alice Fusaro1, Juan Pu1, Yong Zhou1, Lu Lu, Luca Tassoni, Yu Lan, Tommy Tsan-Yuk Lam, Zoe Song, Justin Bahl, Jiani Chen, George F. Gao, Isabella Monne, Jinhua Liu , and The International H9 Evolution Consortium2 Author affiliations: Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Legnaro, Italy (A. Fusaro, L. Tassoni, I. Monne); China Agricultural University, Beijing, China (J. Pu, Y. Zhou, J. Liu); University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK (L. Lu); Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing (Y. Lan); The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (T.T.-Y. Lam, Z. Song); University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA (J. Bahl, J. Chen); Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing (G.F. Gao) Main Article Figure 1 Figure 1. Phylogenetic trees and assigned clades of as part of a proposed global classification and nomenclature system for A/H9 influenza viruses. A) Maximum-likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree obtained using the complete dataset. The branches are colored according to the 3 identified lineages. A/quail/Hong Kong/A28945/1988 and A/Quail/Hong Kong/AF157/1992 were used as an outgroup black). B) ML phylogenetic tree of the Y lineage dataset. Six sequences of the G lineage were used as the outgroup. Numbers next to the clade-defining nodes represent ultra-fast bootstrap supports. Clades are labeled and marked in colors. C) ML phylogenetic tree of the G lineage. Six sequences of the Y lineage were selected as the outgroup. Numbers next to the clade-defining nodes represent ultra-fast bootstrap supports. Clades are labeled and marked in colors. D) ML phylogenetic tree of the B lineage. Six sequences of the Y lineage were used as the outgroup. Numbers next to the clade-defining nodes represent ultra-fast bootstrap supports. Clades are labeled and marked in colors. Scale bars indicate substitutions per site. Main Article 1These first authors contributed equally to this article.2Members of The International H9 Evolution Consortium are listed at the end of this article. Page created: July 12, 2024 Page updated: July 22, 2024 Page reviewed: July 22, 2024 The conclusions, findings, and opinions expressed by authors contributing to this journal do not necessarily reflect the official position of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the Public Health Service, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the authors' affiliated institutions. Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by any of the groups named above. home4EID JournalAbout the JournalexpandGeneral InformationexpandBackground and GoalsEditorsEditorial BoardStaffContactArticlesexpandNovember 2024Infectious Diseases and Carceral Health SupplementEarly ReleasePast IssuesexpandAugust 2024expandProposal for a Global Classification and Nomenclature System for A/H9 Influenza VirusesexpandFigure 1Figure 2Figure 3Figure 4Figure 5Figure 6Figure 7Appendix 1Appendix 2Appendix 3Medscape CMEICEIDSearchexpandAdvanced Article SearchArticles by Country SearchSpotlight TopicsexpandAntimicrobial Resistance SpotlightCoronavirus SpotlightEbola SpotlightEtymologiaFood Safety SpotlightFungal DiseasesHIV/AIDS SpotlightInfluenza SpotlightLyme Disease SpotlightMalaria SpotlightMERS SpotlightMpox SpotlightPneumonia SpotlightRabies SpotlightTicks SpotlightTuberculosis/MycobacteriaZika SpotlightArticle Type SearchEID on PubMed CentralSubscribeAuthor Resource CenterPeer ReviewersPodcastsexpandSearchSocial Media Press & Media Information About CDC Contact Us 800-232-4636 Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat CONTACT CDC Contact Us Call 800-232-4636 Email Us ABOUT CDC About CDC Jobs Funding POLICIES Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA OIG Nondiscrimination Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications CONNECT WITH US Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn Youtube Pinterest Snapchat Email LANGUAGES Español 繁體中文 Tiếng Việt 한국어 Tagalog Русский العربية Kreyòl Ayisyen Français Polski Português Italiano Deutsch 日本語 فارسی English U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Accessibility External Links Privacy Policies No Fear Act FOIA Nondiscrimination OIG Vulnerability Disclosure Policy Public Health Publications USA.gov file_externalIn Case Bird Flu Becomes a Pandemic, Countries Are Preparing | Scientific American Skip to main contentScientific AmericanJuly 17, 20245 min readHow Countries Are Preparing for a Potential Bird Flu PandemicVirologists say that the bird flu strain that is infecting cattle in the U.S. is unlikely to cause a pandemic in humans, but countries are gathering vaccines and stepping up surveillance just in caseBy Smriti Mallapaty & Nature magazineHighly pathogenic avian influenza has been detected in 145 cattle herds in the United States. Daniel Acker/Bloomberg via Getty ImagesAs cases of avian influenza continue to rise in cattle in the United States, countries are preparing for the possibility that the virus could start spreading in people. Many nations are ramping up surveillance, as well as purchasing vaccines or developing new ones.“This virus in its current state does not look like it has the characteristics of causing a pandemic. But with influenza viruses, that equation could entirely change with a single mutation,” says Scott Hensley, an immunologist at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.The highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 has so far been detected in 145 cattle herds and 4 farm workers in a dozen states across the United States. Researchers say many more cases in cows and people have probably gone undetected. The chances of quashing the outbreak get “more slim by the day”, says Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, Canada.On supporting science journalismIf you're enjoying this article, consider supporting our award-winning journalism by subscribing. By purchasing a subscription you are helping to ensure the future of impactful stories about the discoveries and ideas shaping our world today.Studies suggest that the virus is spreading between cows through contaminated milking equipment, rather than airborne particles. The biggest risk is that it could evolve to infect mammals more effectively, including through the respiratory system, which would make it more difficult to contain. Given the close and regular contact that cows have with people, airborne transmission could spark a pandemic.Efforts to prepare for that possibility include risk assessments, modelling and outbreak predictions. “There is loads of planning and preparedness going on internationally,” says Michelle Wille, a virus ecologist at the University of Melbourne in Australia.Nicole Lurie, who heads preparedness and response at the Oslo-based Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), says the coalition’s approach “for the moment is one of ‘calm urgency’” — “like putting our shoes on in case we need to start running”.Vaccinating peopleA key focus of pandemic preparedness efforts is vaccines, which would protect people from getting ill should the virus spread more widely. Vaccinating people would also reduce the risk of H5N1 mixing with seasonal influenza viruses that are already well-adapted to spread in humans.In May, the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland, initiated a review of available influenza candidate vaccines, and confirmed that they would work against the H5N1 virus circulating in cattle. “Although the current public health risk is low, WHO is operating in a constant state of readiness for a potential influenza pandemic,” says Maria Van Kerkhove, who heads epidemic and pandemic preparedness and prevention at the WHO.Last month, the European Commission purchased roughly 700,000 doses of a flu vaccine manufactured by CSL Seqirus, in Maidenhead, UK, with the option to buy another 40 million. The vaccine protects against H5 strains of influenza A. Also in June, Finland began vaccinating people against avian influenza, focusing on high-risk workers at fur and poultry farms.Other countries, especially the United States, should also consider vaccinating high-risk workers, says Rasmussen. In May, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) purchased almost five million more doses of the CSL Seqirus influenza vaccine for its stockpile.But currently available vaccines rely on inactivated strains of viruses grown in chicken eggs, which are cheap, but slow, to produce. Researchers are developing vaccines using mRNA technology; these are more expensive but quicker to manufacture, and their formulation can be updated to target emerging strains. “It really is a game-changer,” says Hensley, who has developed an H5 mRNA vaccine candidate and tested it in ferrets. “In the case of a pandemic, you can expect that these vaccines will be used widely.”Last week, the HHS announced that it had provided the pharmaceutical company Moderna, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, with US$176 million to develop an mRNA-based vaccine against H5 influenza.CEPI is working to ensure that the response is equitable worldwide. Half of existing vaccine supplies are already tied up in contracts or export controls, says Lurie, and it’s important to make sure that the remaining doses reach the people who need them. “As we saw during the COVID-19 pandemic, low- and middle-income countries could once again be pushed to the back of the queue.”Doses for cowsCountries including the United States are investigating the possibility of vaccinating cattle to reduce transmission. “This could be a phenomenal mitigation effort” and would be practical to implement as part of existing drives to vaccinate livestock, says Jenna Guthmiller, an immunologist at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus in Aurora.Several research teams are in the early stages of developing vaccines for cattle. But there are challenges to overcome. Studies suggest that the virus spreading in cattle finds safe harbour in the mammary glands and epithelial cells of the udder. This could be a challenging site in which to elicit a protective immune response, says Diego Diel, a virologist at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, who is developing candidate vaccines against highly pathogenic avian influenza that use harmless DNA viruses to deliver genetic material. Hensley is currently testing his mRNA vaccine in cattle and swine.But one concern is that vaccines could cover up symptoms in animals that are still infectious, which would increase the risk to people, says Thomas Peacock, a virologist at Imperial College London.Vaccines should be seen as a measure of last resort, after implementing all other layers of containment, says Martin Beer, a virologist at the Federal Research Institute for Animal Health in Greifswald, Germany. They protect against “a worst-case scenario”.SurveillanceTo stay ahead of the virus, countries are also tracking its spread through increased testing of people and animals. Before the US outbreak, researchers didn’t think cattle could be infected with avian influenza. They are now scrambling to develop tests specific to this host.Isabella Monne, who studies the molecular epidemiology of animal viruses at the Experimental Zooprophylactic Institute of Venice in Legnaro, Italy, is developing and evaluating tools to help laboratories across Europe to detect viral particles and antibodies, which are evidence of past infection, in cow blood and milk. Groups across Europe, Canada and the United States have started testing cow blood or bulk milk samples.Researchers are also monitoring sequences of the virus’s genome for changes that would improve its ability to infect cells found in the upper airways. These mutations would increase the risk to people.One group has created a library of every possible amino-acid mutation on the haemagglutinin protein, which the virus uses to enter cells. The researchers tested in human cells how well the mutated proteins bind to upper-airway receptors, and their stability in acidic environments — traits “known to correlate with viruses going from avian to mammalian hosts, and becoming pandemics”, says Peacock, a co-author of the study, which has not been peer reviewed. Scanning for those mutations could allow real-time risk prediction, he says.This article is reproduced with permission and was first published on July 12, 2024.Smriti Mallapaty is a senior reporter at Nature.More by Smriti MallapatyFirst published in 1869, Nature is the world's leading multidisciplinary science journal. Nature publishes the finest peer-reviewed research that drives ground-breaking discovery, and is read by thought-leaders and decision-makers around the world.More by Nature magazineExpand Your World with ScienceLearn and share the most exciting discoveries, innovations and ideas shaping our world today.SubscribeSign up for our newslettersSee the latest storiesRead the latest issueGive a Gift SubscriptionFollow Us:Return & Refund PolicyAboutPress RoomFAQsContact UsInternational EditionsAdvertiseAccessibility StatementTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyCalifornia Consumer Privacy StatementUse of cookies/Do not sell my dataScientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.© 2024 SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, A DIVISION OF SPRINGER NATURE AMERICA, INC.ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.Alveo Technologies Demonstrates its Rapid Avian Influenza Molecular Test Panel Detects Latest H5N1 Variants in Cattle and the Recent Human Infections in Colorado Resources Blog Journalists Log In Sign Up Data Privacy Send a Release News Products Contact Search Search When typing in this field, a list of search results will appear and be automatically updated as you type. Searching for your content... No results found. Please change your search terms and try again. News in Focus Browse News Releases All News Releases All Public Company English-only News Releases Overview Multimedia Gallery All Multimedia All Photos All Videos Multimedia Gallery Overview Trending Topics All Trending Topics Business & Money Auto & TransportationAll Automotive & Transportation Aerospace, Defense Air Freight Airlines & Aviation Automotive Maritime & Shipbuilding Railroads and Intermodal Transportation Supply Chain/Logistics Transportation, Trucking & Railroad Travel Trucking and Road Transportation Auto & Transportation OverviewView All Auto & Transportation Business TechnologyAll Business Technology Blockchain Broadcast Tech Computer & Electronics Computer Hardware Computer Software Data Analytics Electronic Commerce Electronic Components Electronic Design Automation Financial Technology High Tech Security Internet Technology Nanotechnology Networks Peripherals Semiconductors Business Technology OverviewView All Business Technology Entertain­ment & MediaAll Entertain­ment & Media Advertising Art Books Entertainment Film and Motion Picture Magazines Music Publishing & Information Services Radio & Podcast Television Entertain­ment & Media OverviewView All Entertain­ment & Media Financial Services & InvestingAll Financial Services & Investing Accounting News & Issues Acquisitions, Mergers and Takeovers Banking & Financial Services Bankruptcy Bond & Stock Ratings Conference Call Announcements Contracts Cryptocurrency Dividends Earnings Earnings Forecasts & Projections Financing Agreements Insurance Investments Opinions Joint Ventures Mutual Funds Private Placement Real Estate Restructuring & Recapitalization Sales Reports Shareholder Activism Shareholder Meetings Stock Offering Stock Split Venture Capital Financial Services & Investing OverviewView All Financial Services & Investing General BusinessAll General Business Awards Commercial Real Estate Corporate Expansion Earnings Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Human Resource & Workforce Management Licensing New Products & Services Obituaries Outsourcing Businesses Overseas Real Estate (non-US) Personnel Announcements Real Estate Transactions Residential Real Estate Small Business Services Socially Responsible Investing Surveys, Polls and Research Trade Show News General Business OverviewView All General Business Science & Tech Consumer TechnologyAll Consumer Technology Artificial Intelligence Blockchain Cloud Computing/Internet of Things Computer Electronics Computer Hardware Computer Software Consumer Electronics Cryptocurrency Data Analytics Electronic Commerce Electronic Gaming Financial Technology Mobile Entertainment Multimedia & Internet Peripherals Social Media STEM (Science, Tech, Engineering, Math) Supply Chain/Logistics Wireless Communications Consumer Technology OverviewView All Consumer Technology Energy & Natural ResourcesAll Energy Alternative Energies Chemical Electrical Utilities Gas General Manufacturing Mining Mining & Metals Oil & Energy Oil and Gas Discoveries Utilities Water Utilities Energy & Natural Resources OverviewView All Energy & Natural Resources Environ­mentAll Environ­ment Conservation & Recycling Environmental Issues Environmental Policy Environmental Products & Services Green Technology Natural Disasters Environ­ment OverviewView All Environ­ment Heavy Industry & ManufacturingAll Heavy Industry & Manufacturing Aerospace & Defense Agriculture Chemical Construction & Building General Manufacturing HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning) Machinery Machine Tools, Metalworking and Metallurgy Mining Mining & Metals Paper, Forest Products & Containers Precious Metals Textiles Tobacco Heavy Industry & Manufacturing OverviewView All Heavy Industry & Manufacturing Telecomm­unicationsAll Telecomm­unications Carriers and Services Mobile Entertainment Networks Peripherals Telecommunications Equipment Telecommunications Industry VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) Wireless Communications Telecomm­unications OverviewView All Telecomm­unications Lifestyle & Health Consumer Products & RetailAll Consumer Products & Retail Animals & Pets Beers, Wines and Spirits Beverages Bridal Services Cannabis Cosmetics and Personal Care Fashion Food & Beverages Furniture and Furnishings Home Improvement Household, Consumer & Cosmetics Household Products Jewelry Non-Alcoholic Beverages Office Products Organic Food Product Recalls Restaurants Retail Supermarkets Toys Consumer Products & Retail OverviewView All Consumer Products & Retail Entertain­ment & MediaAll Entertain­ment & Media Advertising Art Books Entertainment Film and Motion Picture Magazines Music Publishing & Information Services Radio & Podcast Television Entertain­ment & Media OverviewView All Entertain­ment & Media HealthAll Health Biometrics Biotechnology Clinical Trials & Medical Discoveries Dentistry FDA Approval Fitness/Wellness Health Care & Hospitals Health Insurance Infection Control International Medical Approval Medical Equipment Medical Pharmaceuticals Mental Health Pharmaceuticals Supplementary Medicine Health OverviewView All Health SportsAll Sports General Sports Outdoors, Camping & Hiking Sporting Events Sports Equipment & Accessories Sports OverviewView All Sports TravelAll Travel Amusement Parks and Tourist Attractions Gambling & Casinos Hotels and Resorts Leisure & Tourism Outdoors, Camping & Hiking Passenger Aviation Travel Industry Travel OverviewView All Travel Policy & Public Interest Policy & Public InterestAll Policy & Public Interest Advocacy Group Opinion Animal Welfare Congressional & Presidential Campaigns Corporate Social Responsibility Domestic Policy Economic News, Trends, Analysis Education Environmental European Government FDA Approval Federal and State Legislation Federal Executive Branch & Agency Foreign Policy & International Affairs Homeland Security Labor & Union Legal Issues Natural Disasters Not For Profit Patent Law Public Safety Trade Policy U.S. State Policy Policy & Public Interest OverviewView All Policy & Public Interest People & Culture People & Culture All People & Culture Aboriginal, First Nations & Native American African American Asian American Children Diversity, Equity & Inclusion Hispanic Lesbian, Gay & Bisexual Men's Interest People with Disabilities Religion Senior Citizens Veterans Women People & Culture Overview View All People & Culture In-Language News Arabic español português Česko Danmark Deutschland España France Italia Nederland Norge Polska Portugal Россия Slovensko Suomi Sverige Overview Distribution by PR Newswire Cision IR Guaranteed Paid Placement SocialBoost All Products General Inquiries Editorial Bureaus Partnerships Media Inquiries Worldwide Offices Hamburger menu Send a Release ALL CONTACT INFO Contact Us 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 10 PM ET Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR News in Focus Browse All News Multimedia Gallery Trending Topics Business & Money Auto & Transportation Business Technology Entertain­ment & Media Financial Services & Investing General Business Science & Tech Consumer Technology Energy & Natural Resources Environ­ment Heavy Industry & Manufacturing Telecomm­unications Lifestyle & Health Consumer Products & Retail Entertain­ment & Media Health Sports Travel Policy & Public Interest People & Culture People & Culture Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR Overview Distribution by PR Newswire Cision IR SocialBoost All Products Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR General Inquiries Editorial Bureaus Partnerships Media Inquiries Worldwide Offices Send a Release Sign Up Log In Resources Blog Journalists RSS GDPR Alveo Technologies Demonstrates its Rapid Avian Influenza Molecular Test Panel Detects Latest H5N1 Variants in Cattle and the Recent Human Infections in Colorado News provided by Alveo Technologies Jul 18, 2024, 10:58 ET Share this article Share toX Share this article Share toX The ongoing outbreak in cattle increases the risk of further mutations to spread efficiently in humans highlighting the need for an accurate decentralized testing ecosystem ALAMEDA, Calif., July 18, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- Alveo Technologies, Inc. (Alveo), a leader in molecular sensing and diagnostics with its proprietary technology platform, today announced that it has demonstrated in silico that its rapid, hand held, point of need molecular diagnostic for avian influenza can detect the H5N1 variant based on sequences published from recent human infections in Colorado, as well as those found in infected cattle. On July 15 and 16, GISAID (the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data database) released the genetic sequence of the H5N1 viruses that recently infected one of the dairy farm workers in Colorado. Notably, GISAID said that a "mammalian adaptation marker (E627K) was noted in one of the farm workers." The method of transmission among cattle remains unknown, but the implications are concerning. It is possible that cattle are shedding a mammalian-adapted virus that could be reintroduced to commercial poultry, or that selection pressures are driving the virus towards mammalian adaptation. In either case, the ongoing outbreak among cattle increases the risk that H5N1 will gain the ability to spread efficiently among humans. The UK Health Security Agency released a report in May that stated, "The baseline risk of influenza A(H5N1) evolving to cause human transmission before the current cattle outbreak was previously considered to be a remote chance (0-5%). There is consensus that this risk has now increased. However, with current limited information we cannot resolve the risk further and it may fall at highly unlikely (10-20%) or unlikely (25-35%)." Testing is a critical component in the fight against emerging infectious diseases, and recent outbreaks highlight the urgent need to increase testing capacity for avian influenza for both animals and humans. Alveo conducted in silico analysis using their previously developed Avian influenza A subtype H5 LAMP designs on recently reported human and bovine sequences obtained from GISAID. Results show that Alveo H5 designs are concordant with all 12 reported sequences of emerging influenza A subtype H5 sequences. This suggests that the LAMP Avian influenza assay is capable of detecting all 12 reported sequences belonging to clade 4.3.4.4b, H5N1, including the variants found in humans. Alveo expects the Flockscreen LAMP Avian Influenza Molecular Test for poultry, the first diagnostic of its kind that can test both cloacal and oropharyngeal samples, and which the company developed with numerous partners, to begin shipping to Europe and the Middle East in the third quarter of 2024 once validation and verification activities have concluded with the relevant regulatory bodies. The company is now actively working to validate avian influenza diagnostics for both human and bovine use cases. "Avian influenza has already caused enormous damage to the poultry industry and has devastated populations of wild birds," said Shaun Holt, CEO of Alveo Technologies. "We still have time to prevent H5N1 from evolving further into a dangerous virus that spreads efficiently among people, but to do so, we need fast, precision diagnostics for both humans and animals. Alveo's portable and rugged, rapid molecular testing platform can fill this gap, providing accurate results to supplement limited lab resources and capacity. Given the urgent need, we have been relentless with respect to the time and resources we've devoted to developing our H5N1 test; we've also partnered with industry leaders which allowed for access to countless actual field samples of the virus to confirm sensitivity and specificity for the real world. These initial results, indicating we can detect the virus in cattle and humans in addition to poultry, is confirmation of our rigor in the product development process and is very much aligned with our strategic positioning at the intersection of human, animal and food health." About AlveoAlveo is the first company to make molecular detection and diagnostics universally accessible – on the farm, in the field, in the clinic, or in the manufacturing plant – helping prevent or significantly limit the destructive impact of viruses, fungi, bacteria, and other pathogens by detecting earlier at the Point of Need™. Alveo's rugged and portable, multiplex-capable diagnostic platform employs a patented method of direct electrical sensing of nucleic acid amplification to provide affordable, rapid, and accurate results. By enabling early pathogen detection, Alveo helps manage global health, food security, and supply chain resiliency by providing actionable insights at lightspeed. Know Sooner, Act Faster™ with Alveo. For more, visit: https://www.alveotechnologies.com/ CONTACT: Jeff Miller, [email protected], 541-207-6413 SOURCE Alveo Technologies WANT YOUR COMPANY'S NEWS FEATURED ON PRNEWSWIRE.COM? 440k+ Newsrooms & Influencers 9k+ Digital Media Outlets 270k+ Journalists Opted In GET STARTED × Modal title Also from this source Alveo Technologies Begins Shipping the First Point-of-Need™ Molecular Test for Avian Influenza in Poultry to the EU Alveo Technologies, Inc. (Alveo), a leader in decentralized molecular diagnostics with its proprietary IntelliSense™ platform, today announced the... Alveo Technologies Launches Academic Partnership Program to Drive Innovation in Point-of-Need Molecular Diagnostics with Global Virus Network as Inaugural Partner Alveo Technologies, Inc. (Alveo), a leader in molecular sensing and diagnostics with its proprietary IntelliSense molecular detection technology... More Releases From This Source Explore Health Care & Hospitals Medical Pharmaceuticals Computer & Electronics Computer Software News Releases in Similar Topics Contact PR Newswire Call PR Newswire at 888-776-0942 from 8 AM - 9 PM ET Chat with an Expert Contact Us General Inquiries Partnerships Media Inquiries Products For Marketers For Public Relations For IR & Compliance For Agency For Small Business All Products About About PR Newswire About Cision Become a Publishing Partner Become a Channel Partner Careers Accessibility Statement Global Sites Asia APAC APAC - Traditional Chinese Brazil Canada Czech Denmark Finland France Germany India Indonesia Israel Korea Italy Japan Mexico Middle East Middle East - Arabic Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Russia Slovakia Spain Sweden United Kingdom My Services All New Releases Online Member Center ProfNet Do not sell or share my personal information: Submit via [email protected] Call Privacy toll-free: 877-297-8921 Contact PR Newswire Products About My Services All News Releases Online Member Center ProfNet Call PR Newswire at 888-776-0942 Terms of Use Privacy Policy Information Security Policy Site Map RSS Cookie Settings Copyright © 2024 Cision US Inc.Animal shelters and rescues halt out-of-state intake, adoptions, due to Canine Influenza outbreak | Delaware First Media Search Query Show Search Home Delaware News Arts Business Culture, Lifestyle & Sports Education Politics & Government Science, Health, Tech Other Delaware Stories Arts Business Culture, Lifestyle & Sports Education Politics & Government Science, Health, Tech Other Delaware Stories Programs Radio Schedule The Green Candidate Conversations 2024 Generation Voice Hometown Heroes Radio Schedule The Green Candidate Conversations 2024 Generation Voice Hometown Heroes Election 2024 About Us Annual Report 2023 People Board of Directors Community Advisory Board General Info & Policies Underwriting Employment Opportunities Contact Us Annual Report 2023 People Board of Directors Community Advisory Board General Info & Policies Underwriting Employment Opportunities Contact Us Find Us General Info Mobile App Facebook YouTube LinkedIn General Info Mobile App Facebook YouTube LinkedIn Radio Schedule Newsletters Ways to Donate Donate Online Now Donate A Vehicle Donate Online Now Donate A Vehicle © 2024 Delaware Public Media Menu Show Search Search Query Donate Play Live Radio Next Up: 0:00 0:00 0:00 0:00 Available On Air Stations On Air Now Playing Delaware Public Media On Air Home Delaware News Arts Business Culture, Lifestyle & Sports Education Politics & Government Science, Health, Tech Other Delaware Stories Arts Business Culture, Lifestyle & Sports Education Politics & Government Science, Health, Tech Other Delaware Stories Programs Radio Schedule The Green Candidate Conversations 2024 Generation Voice Hometown Heroes Radio Schedule The Green Candidate Conversations 2024 Generation Voice Hometown Heroes Election 2024 About Us Annual Report 2023 People Board of Directors Community Advisory Board General Info & Policies Underwriting Employment Opportunities Contact Us Annual Report 2023 People Board of Directors Community Advisory Board General Info & Policies Underwriting Employment Opportunities Contact Us Find Us General Info Mobile App Facebook YouTube LinkedIn General Info Mobile App Facebook YouTube LinkedIn Radio Schedule Newsletters Ways to Donate Donate Online Now Donate A Vehicle Donate Online Now Donate A Vehicle Science, Health, Tech Animal shelters and rescues halt out-of-state intake, adoptions, due to Canine Influenza outbreak Delaware Public Media | By Rachel Sawicki Published July 16, 2024 at 10:00 PM EDT Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Listen • 1:11 Out-of-state dog transports are suspended for 30 days as shelters grapple with an outbreak of Canine Influenza.The control order issued last week mandates all Delaware shelters and rescues suspend out-of-state transports, as well as out-of-state intakes or adoptions.State Veterinarian Karen Lopez confirmed Friday three shelters and one rescue group have been affected by the outbreak. This includes Humane Animal Partners in Wilmington, which confirmed Monday 30 dogs at that location are being treated for a double strain of Canine Influenza. HAP suspended all adoptions and intake, in- or out-of-state until further notice. “The severity of the illnesses was not what we would typically see with kennel cough," Lopez says. "As well as the number of dogs within these shelters and rescue group that are being seen with respiratory illness. But there have also been two dogs that have been seen at the emergency hospitals that have died.”Canine influenza is a highly contagious respiratory illness that spreads through air droplets and can be transferred by coughing, sneezing, and barking. Symptoms include coughing, sneezing, eye and nasal discharge, lethargy and fever. Pet owners with dogs exhibiting symptoms should consult their vet immediately.The Office of Animal Welfare released an advisory Tuesday morning, urging the public to do their part to reduce intake at shelters and rescues, which includes using other resources to reunite lost dogs with their owners.OAW Executive Director Christina Motoyoshi says dogs are often found very close to home, and a quick walk around the neighborhood may result in a reunion quicker than impoundment would.“Knock on a few doors, walk it around, post it on social media, post it on the state’s lost and found pet registry, nine times out of 10 you’re going to get that dog home without any need for impoundment, which only stresses the animal out, stresses the owner out, and risks disease.”Brandywine Valley SPCA in-state adoptions and intakes remain active – Communications Director Sara Smith says they are vaccinating all of their dogs for the virus in an effort to stop the spread. Science, Health, Tech Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Rachel Sawicki Rachel Sawicki was born and raised in Camden, Delaware and attended the Caesar Rodney School District. They graduated from the University of Delaware in 2021 with a double degree in Communications and English and as a leader in the Student Television Network, WVUD and The Review. See stories by Rachel Sawicki Stay Connected instagram youtube facebook linkedin © 2024 Delaware Public Media Privacy Policy Legal Employment & InternshipsPresence of bird flu virus in milk is key clue for ISU researchersSkip to main content HomeNewsPoliticsSportsThings To DoBusinessMetro NewsOpinionObituariesAbout UseNewspaperWeatherAdvertise with UsArchivesCrosswordsComicsNewslettersConnect With UsIowa CaucusesContributor Content Iowa State University research identifies possible point of entry for avian flu in cattleBrooklyn Draisey | Iowa Capital DispatchAs avian influenza is being detected in more and more dairy herds across the U.S., Iowa State University researchers have found a possible explanation for why the virus shows up in raw milk.A study published this month by a team at ISU’s College of Veterinary Medicine found that bovine mammary gland tissue holds receptors for the avian influenza virus.Todd Bell, a professor of veterinary pathology and co-author of the study, said the idea to look at mammary glands as a potential entry point for the virus came after it was identified in raw milk. Two ISU alums in the spring identified an illness impacting cattle in Texas as avian flu, and ever since, teams at the university and in partnerships with other organizations have been working to tackle the virus and its spread from different angles.More: Would vaccines stop bird flu, now jumping from poultry to dairy cows? It's complicated.“They really answered the ‘what,’ what was actually going on, what was making these cattle sick, which is a new and novel finding, and then our job, really, at that point as researchers was to understand the ‘why,’” Bell said. “We’ve never seen this before. Why is this happening?”To understand the concept, Bell suggested thinking of viruses as like keys, and receptors like locks to cells. In order for the avian flu virus to enter a cell and reproduce, it needs the right receptor. The research team found that receptor on cattle mammary glands.Another receptor they found is connected to human influenza, Bell said, which is important because it opens up the possibility of a cell being infected by both viruses, potentially causing the creation of a new virus.“To our knowledge, that hasn’t happened yet in this particular outbreak, but we wanted to look for those receptors to understand what might be possible and hopefully stop the transmission and stop that from happening,” Bell said.The team also looked at cattle's respiratory system to try to identify evidence of the bird flu, but found little there, narrowing down the possibilities of how they are being infected.According to the American Veterinary Medical Association, as of July 12 the avian influenza had been detected in dairy herds in 12 states, including 13 herds in Iowa. While the virus is being detected in raw milk, the pasteurization process ensures the milk is safe to be consumed.Research may inform preventative policiesWhile Bell and his colleague’s work is still very much focused on the “why” of avian flu in dairy herds and its spread, he said the hope is their research will help inform regulators in making decisions on testing and biosecurity measures to stop the spread of the virus. He said there is some literature that states the virus can live on milking machines for a few hours after an infected cow is hooked up to them, offering one potential method of spread.“We hope that what we find will help them make those types of decisions, specifically if we can find it in mammary tissue, then how do we stop it from getting to that mammary tissue in the first place,” Bell said.Next steps for Bell and his colleagues include looking at the milk and mammary glands of other domestic animals, like sheep and goats, to see if they also carry receptors for the avian flu. Bell said they also will look at the respiratory systems and gastrointestinal tracts of livestock to see if the flu could have other points of entry, for instance contamination by virus-carrying wild birds of the animals' water supply.In addition, Iowa Secretary of Agriculture Mike Naig said during “Iowa Press” last week that longitudinal studies are being conducted on farms to test every animal housed there in order to track how the virus moves and determine how it exits the herd.“Because it will, it will eventually exit that herd and you want to be able to track those things and have an expectation of how long does that last,” Naig said.Find this storyat Iowa Capital Dispatch, which is part of States Newsroom, a network of news bureaus supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity. Iowa Capital Dispatch maintains editorial independence. Contact Editor Kathie Obradovich for questions: kobradovich@iowacapitaldispatch.com. Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024FluGen’s intranasal flu vaccine boosts flu shot efficacy CT Menu Search Sections HomeNewsAnalysisFeaturesComment & OpinionProjectsData InsightsSectorsClinical TrialsApprovalsOperationsOutsourced ServicesSupply ChainData ManagementMedical DevicesThemesArtificial IntelligenceCloudCorporate GovernanceCybersecurityEnvironmental SustainabilityInternet of ThingsRoboticsSocial ResponsibilityCovid-19InsightsDealsJobsFilingsPatentsSocial MediaCompaniesCompany A-ZCompany CategoriesProduct & ServicesCompany ReleasesWhite PapersVideosBuyer's GuidesPartner ContentEventsBuy ReportsExcellence AwardsInnovation RankingsMagazineNewsletters GlobalData About Us Advertise With Us Contact Us Our Marketing Solution GlobalData Reports Visit GlobalData From Our Partners Optimizing Cell & Gene Therapy Processes Accelerating Clinical Trials Improving decentralized trials with mobile research nursing The next chapter of clinical trial services Trusted clinical trial packaging services Meet critical milestones NewsAnalysisSectionsFeaturesComment & OpinionProjectsData InsightsLatestAdapting diabetes clinical trials to embrace underrepresented communitiesMapping out strategies to overcome challenges in clinical researchBIOSECURE Act: Companies turn to US manufacturersSectorsSectionsClinical TrialsApprovalsOperationsOutsourced ServicesSupply ChainData ManagementMedical DevicesLatestPalleon Pharmaceuticals reports Phase I/II trial results of E-602 for solid tumoursOncoResponse reports data from Phase I solid tumour treatment trialAveritas completes recruitment for trial of QUTENZA to treat post-surgical painThemesSectionsArtificial IntelligenceCloudCorporate GovernanceCybersecurityEnvironmental SustainabilityInternet of ThingsRoboticsSocial ResponsibilityCovid-19Foreign Direct InvestmentLatestEthics and regulation come into focus in the age of AI-powered clinical trialsCorcept’s relacorilant GRADIENT trial misses primary endpointReeves’ 2024 budget promises life sciences investmentInsightsSectionsDealsJobsFilingsPatentsSocial MediaLatestQ2 2024 update: social responsibility related hiring actvity in the pharma industryQ2 2024 update: environmental sustainability related hiring actvity in the pharma industryQ2 2024 update: cloud related hiring actvity in the pharma industryCompaniesSectionsCompany A-ZCompany CategoriesProducts & ServicesCompany ReleasesWhite PapersVideosBuyer's GuidesPartner ContentLatestLeading sales and marketing intent data, database and data enrichment providers and technology solutions for the clinical trials industryPharma cold chains: Major trends shaping the next decadeThe fundamentals of developing parenteral drug products EventsBuy ReportsNewsletters CT News FluGen’s intranasal flu vaccine boosts flu shot efficacy A study shows that the co-administration of FluGen’s intranasal M2SR and a high-dose flu shot improves the overall efficacy of flu vaccines in the elderly population. Phalguni Deswal July 15, 2024 Share Copy Link Share on X Share on Linkedin Share on Facebook FluGen’s intranasal vaccine is an H3N2 M2-deficient single-replication (M2SR) influenza vaccine. Image Credit: Dragana Gordic / Shutterstock. FluGen has published the results of a Phase I trial showing that its intranasal flu vaccine, M2SR, when used in combination with Sanofi’s Fluzone high dose (Fluzone HD) inactivated influenza vaccine, increases the efficacy of the Fluzone HD vaccine. The Phase Ib trial (NCT05163847) enrolled 305 participants aged 65-85 years who were randomised to receive either M2SR, Fluzone HD, the combination therapy of M2SR and Fluzone HD, or a placebo. The study was funded by the US Department of Defense (DOD) and the data was published in the Lancet journal. Go deeper with GlobalDataReportsLOA and PTSR Model - Neumifil in Influenza A Virus, H7N9 Subtype In... ReportsLOA and PTSR Model - QNIV in Seasonal Influenza Data Insights The gold standard of business intelligence. Find out more Related Company ProfilesSanofiModerna IncCurevac NVGSK plcView all “Influenza continues to be a major cause of seasonal respiratory epidemics with significant morbidity and mortality, especially in older adults. Current vaccines fall short in three main areas – they don’t last long enough, they don’t protect against viruses that mutate and they don’t block the initial infection in the upper respiratory tract,” said Robert Belshe, founder of Saint Louis University’s Center for Vaccine Development “The results from this study represent a potential solution that might save millions of older adults from getting sick or worse.” M2SR vaccine is an intranasal H3N2 M2-deficient single-replication (M2SR) influenza vaccine. The intranasal administration invokes mucosal antibodies and prevents influenza viruses from entering the nasal mucosa. Standard flu vaccines such as Fluzone HD elicit an antibody response in the blood and help combat the virus after it enters the body. Therefore, combining both intranasal and standard flu vaccines can provide total coverage. The Phase Ib trial met its primary endpoint of safety and tolerability. The commonly observed side effects include rhinorrhoea, nasal congestion, sore throat, and injection site pain. How well do you really know your competitors? Access the most comprehensive Company Profiles on the market, powered by GlobalData. Save hours of research. Gain competitive edge. View profiles in store Company Profile – free sample Thank you! Your download email will arrive shortly Not ready to buy yet? Download a free sample We are confident about the unique quality of our Company Profiles. However, we want you to make the most beneficial decision for your business, so we offer a free sample that you can download by submitting the below form By GlobalData Submit Country * UK USA Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Democratic Republic of the Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d"Ivoire Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Réunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and The South Sandwich Islands Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates US Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam British Virgin Islands US Virgin Islands Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Kosovo Industry * Academia & Education Aerospace, Defense & Security Agriculture Asset Management Automotive Banking & Payments Chemicals Construction Consumer Foodservice Government, trade bodies and NGOs Health & Fitness Hospitals & Healthcare HR, Staffing & Recruitment Insurance Investment Banking Legal Services Management Consulting Marketing & Advertising Media & Publishing Medical Devices Mining Oil & Gas Packaging Pharmaceuticals Power & Utilities Private Equity Real Estate Retail Sport Technology Telecom Transportation & Logistics Travel, Tourism & Hospitality Venture Capital Tick here to opt out of curated industry news, reports, and event updates from Clinical Trials Arena. Submit and download Visit our Privacy Policy for more information about our services, how we may use, process and share your personal data, including information of your rights in respect of your personal data and how you can unsubscribe from future marketing communications. Our services are intended for corporate subscribers and you warrant that the email address submitted is your corporate email address. The development of influenza vaccines has seen an uptick in recent years. In June, Moderna reported positive Phase III trial (NCT06097273) data for its mRNA vaccine candidate, Spikevax, for the combined treatment of influenza and Covid-19. The trial evaluated Spikevax against Fluzone HD in the elderly population and against GSK’s Fluraix in the younger age group. Curevac and GSK are also investigating an influenza A (H5N1) pre-pandemic vaccine candidate in a Phase I/II trial. The vaccine targets the H5N1 avian influenza virus. Sign up for our daily news round-up! Give your business an edge with our leading industry insights. Sign up Share Copy Link Share on X Share on Linkedin Share on Facebook Go deeper with GlobalData Reports LOA and PTSR Model - Neumifil in Influenza A Virus, H7N9 Subtype In... Reports LOA and PTSR Model - QNIV in Seasonal Influenza Data Insights The gold standard of business intelligence. Find out more Related Company Profiles Sanofi Moderna Inc Curevac NV GSK plc View all Sign up for our daily news round-up! Give your business an edge with our leading industry insights. Give your business an edge with our leading industry insights. close close Sign up to the newsletter: In Brief I would also like to subscribe to: I consent to Verdict Media Limited collecting my details provided via this form in accordance with Privacy Policy Subscribe Visit our Privacy Policy for more information about our services, how we may use, process and share your personal data, including information of your rights in respect of your personal data and how you can unsubscribe from future marketing communications. Our services are intended for corporate subscribers and you warrant that the email address submitted is your corporate email address. Thank you for subscribing View all newsletters from across the GlobalData Media network. close Hard data and deep insights on clinical trials strategy & operations About us Advertise with us License our content Contact us Editorial approach Newsletters Our marketing solution Privacy policy Terms and conditions Sitemap Powered by © Verdict Media Limited 2024 Lost Password Back ⟶ Login Register Get new password Lost Password? Login Registration is disabled.Maps show US counties affected by bird flu casesSkip to main content HomeU.S.SportsEntertainmentLifeMoneyTechTravelOpinionFor SubscribersWeatherInvestigationsCrosswordsHumankindNewslettersMediaFor YouContributor Content Bird flu is widening its reach. Maps show US counties affected by outbreak.Janet Loehrke USA TODAYFour Colorado poultry farm employees are the latest confirmed cases of bird flu – also known as Avian influenza H5N1. The U.S. total stands at nine, although another worker's test results could soon push it to 10.The outbreak worries researchers because the virus can infect other animals, such as cattle and poultry. A recent study shows that the virus can jump back and forth between birds and cows, which may help it spread over large geographic areas.Bird flu virus outbreak in backyard and commercial poultryOf the nine human cases of bird flu in the U.S. since 2022, five followed exposure to poultry. The other cases followed exposure to dairy cows. While no one needed to be admitted to the hospital, each had a mild respiratory condition and conjunctivitis.As of July 15, nearly 100 million poultry birds in the U.S. have been affected by the virus since 2022, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The outbreak has reached 526 counties in 48 states. Unable to view our graphics? Click here to see them. More: Colorado workers exposed to bird flu while killing infected chickens, feds sayBird flu virus outbreak in dairy cowsThe multistate outbreak, the first seen in cattle, probably began late last year.The CDC and the U.S. Department of Agriculture say milk and milk products are still safe although more than 160 dairy herds (as of July 18) have been affected in 13 states. Health officials say they are analyzing raw meat samples from markets to ensure it's safe for consumption in places where cows have contracted bird flu.Tracking the spread of bird fluHealth officials worry these outbreaks could expose people who work with animals more frequently to the virus. In turn, the virus might mutate and become transmissible among people – potentially leading to an outbreak or even a pandemic. Reports say the virus has been transmitted from wild bird to cow, cow to cow, cow to poultry, cow to human and bird to human. There is no evidence so far of human-to-human transmission.What are the symptoms of bird flu in humans?It's uncommon for bird flu viruses to jump to humans, but it does occasionally occur. Humans can contract the disease by mouth, eyes, or nose, or by inhaling the virus after coming into contact with an infected animal. According to David Boucher, director of the agency's infectious disease preparedness and response, the Department of Health and Human Services' Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response is continuing to produce millions of doses of the bird flu vaccine through July as part of a pre-pandemic stockpile.There is no recommendation yet for people to receive the vaccine, which has not been fully tested or approved for use.CONTRIBUTING: Eduardo Cuevas and Jim SergentSOURCE Reuters, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Nature.com and Harvard Medical School, American Veterinary Medical Association and USA TODAY research Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024Heat was likely a factor in 5 human bird flu infections in Colorado • Missouri Independent HOME NEWS Cannabis Criminal Justice Energy + Environment Health Care Education Decision 2024 Commentary ABOUT SUBSCRIBE DONATE Part of States Newsroom Cannabis Criminal Justice Energy + Environment Health Care Education Decision 2024 17:19 Brief EconomyHealth Care News Briefs Heat was likely a factor in 5 human bird flu infections in Colorado By: Jared Strong - July 16, 2024 5:19 pm Hens are often held in stacks of cages in large egg-laying facilities. (Photo via Getty Images) Soaring temperatures made it difficult for farm workers to protect themselves from chickens recently infected by avian influenza in Colorado and likely contributed to five people contracting the virus, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. State health officials discovered the infections last week — the largest cluster of human infections in the country since the bird flu outbreak began more than two years ago. Human infections are of great concern to public health officials because they increase the likelihood that the virus could mutate to easily pass from person to person and spur a human pandemic. A total of 10 infections among people have been discovered since April 2022. But the virus found in the Colorado workers does not possess such a mutation, said Dr. Nirav Shah, principal deputy director for the CDC, in a Tuesday call with reporters. It’s believed they were each infected by egg-laying chickens as they sought to cull a flock of about 1.8 million in the northeast part of the state. It is customary to kill entire flocks when they are infected by highly pathogenic avian influenza — which readily infects and kills poultry — to prevent its spread to other flocks. The Colorado workers grabbed the chickens, placed them into containers that can hold dozens at a time, and asphyxiated them with carbon dioxide, said Dr. Julie Gauthier, executive director for field operations for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. The workers typically wear suits, goggles, gloves and boots, and they breathe through respirators that protect them from pathogens. But the outdoor temperature at the time of the work was about 100 degrees, and the temperature inside the facility was likely hotter. Giant fans moved air to cool the inside, which circulated potentially virus-laden debris such as feathers. “The difficulty with wearing all that gear in that kind of heat, you can imagine,” Gauthier said, “and it was made more difficult by those fans pushing the air — made it hard to keep those goggles and N95 respirators in place.” The virus that infected the flock is similar to one that has infected dairy cattle in 13 states, Shah said. Colorado has had the most infected herds of any state, with at least 37. It’s possible that the virus was transported to the egg-laying flock from one of those herds, Shah said. Highly pathogenic avian influenza has been spread by wild birds and has been sporadically devastating for U.S. poultry flocks since January 2022. About 99 million birds in infected flocks have been destroyed, according to CDC data. Federal officials believe the virus passed from wild birds to Texas dairy cattle in December. Since then it has spread to herds in other states, likely due to the transportation of infected cattle. From there it is believed to have spread locally to other herds and poultry flocks via people and their equipment, including farm workers and veterinarians. Colorado accounts for seven of the 10 known human infections in the United States that were the result of interactions with sick birds and cows. It had the first-ever infection of a poultry worker, in April 2022. Early this month, a Colorado dairy worker was also infected. The workers who were recently infected had mild symptoms of pink eye and respiratory illness. This story was originally published by the Iowa Capital Dispatch, a States Newsroom affiliate. GET THE MORNING HEADLINES. SUBSCRIBE XHeat was likely a factor in 5 human bird flu infections in Colorado by Jared Strong, Missouri Independent July 16, 2024 Heat was likely a factor in 5 human bird flu infections in Colorado by Jared Strong, Missouri Independent July 16, 2024 Soaring temperatures made it difficult for farm workers to protect themselves from chickens recently infected by avian influenza in Colorado and likely contributed to five people contracting the virus, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. State health officials discovered the infections last week — the largest cluster of human infections in the country since the bird flu outbreak began more than two years ago. Human infections are of great concern to public health officials because they increase the likelihood that the virus could mutate to easily pass from person to person and spur a human pandemic. A total of 10 infections among people have been discovered since April 2022. But the virus found in the Colorado workers does not possess such a mutation, said Dr. Nirav Shah, principal deputy director for the CDC, in a Tuesday call with reporters. It’s believed they were each infected by egg-laying chickens as they sought to cull a flock of about 1.8 million in the northeast part of the state. It is customary to kill entire flocks when they are infected by highly pathogenic avian influenza — which readily infects and kills poultry — to prevent its spread to other flocks. The Colorado workers grabbed the chickens, placed them into containers that can hold dozens at a time, and asphyxiated them with carbon dioxide, said Dr. Julie Gauthier, executive director for field operations for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. The workers typically wear suits, goggles, gloves and boots, and they breathe through respirators that protect them from pathogens. But the outdoor temperature at the time of the work was about 100 degrees, and the temperature inside the facility was likely hotter. Giant fans moved air to cool the inside, which circulated potentially virus-laden debris such as feathers. “The difficulty with wearing all that gear in that kind of heat, you can imagine,” Gauthier said, “and it was made more difficult by those fans pushing the air — made it hard to keep those goggles and N95 respirators in place.” The virus that infected the flock is similar to one that has infected dairy cattle in 13 states, Shah said. Colorado has had the most infected herds of any state, with at least 37. It’s possible that the virus was transported to the egg-laying flock from one of those herds, Shah said. Highly pathogenic avian influenza has been spread by wild birds and has been sporadically devastating for U.S. poultry flocks since January 2022. About 99 million birds in infected flocks have been destroyed, according to CDC data. Federal officials believe the virus passed from wild birds to Texas dairy cattle in December. Since then it has spread to herds in other states, likely due to the transportation of infected cattle. From there it is believed to have spread locally to other herds and poultry flocks via people and their equipment, including farm workers and veterinarians. Colorado accounts for seven of the 10 known human infections in the United States that were the result of interactions with sick birds and cows. It had the first-ever infection of a poultry worker, in April 2022. Early this month, a Colorado dairy worker was also infected. The workers who were recently infected had mild symptoms of pink eye and respiratory illness. This story was originally published by the Iowa Capital Dispatch, a States Newsroom affiliate. GET THE MORNING HEADLINES. SUBSCRIBE Missouri Independent is part of States Newsroom, a nonprofit news network supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity. Missouri Independent maintains editorial independence. Contact Editor Jason Hancock for questions: info@missouriindependent.com. Follow Missouri Independent on Facebook and X. View Republishing Guidelines Copy to clipboard 1Republish Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. AP and Getty images may not be republished. Please see our republishing guidelines for use of any other photos and graphics. Jared StrongJared Strong has written about Iowans and the important issues that affect them for more than 15 years, previously for the Carroll Times Herald and the Des Moines Register. His investigative work exposing police misconduct has notched several state and national awards. He is a longtime trustee of the Iowa Freedom of Information Council, which fights for open records and open government. He is a lifelong Iowan and has lived mostly in rural western parts of the state.MORE FROM AUTHOR Related News GOP lawmaker cites abortion comments in push to replace…by Anna SpoerreNovember 11, 2024 Health experts outline how Trump administration could affect…by Jennifer ShuttNovember 11, 2024 Judge voids actions of illegal board meetings at north…by Rudi KellerNovember 11, 2024 We show you the state Democracy Toolkit // Register to vote | Find your polling place | Find your legislators | Election results and statistics DEMOCRACY TOOLKIT Register to voteFind your polling placeFind your legislatorsElection results and statistics © Missouri Independent, 2024 v1.59.8 ABOUT US The Missouri Independent is a nonprofit, nonpartisan news organization dedicated to relentless investigative journalism and daily reporting that sheds light on state government and its impact on the lives of Missourians. This service is free to readers and other news outlets. We’re part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization. DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. (See full republishing guidelines.) DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy © Missouri Independent, 2024 v1.59.8 States Newsroom Fair. Fearless. Free.ISU research identifies possible point of entry for avian flu in cattle • Iowa Capital Dispatch HOME NEWS Decision 2024 Government + Politics Ag + Environment Health Care Justice Education Commentary ABOUT SUBSCRIBE DONATE Part of States Newsroom Decision 2024 Government + Politics Ag + Environment Health Care Justice Education 11:48 News Story Ag + EnvironmentEducationHealth Care ISU research identifies possible point of entry for avian flu in cattle Researchers hope their work informs policy to help prevent virus’ spread By: Brooklyn Draisey - July 16, 2024 11:48 am Iowa State University researchers have identified receptors for the avian flu on dairy cattle mammary glands. (Photo courtesy of the U.S. Department of Agriculture) As avian influenza is being detected in more and more dairy herds across the U.S., Iowa State University researchers have found a possible “why” connection to the virus being found in raw milk. A study published this month by a team in ISU’s College of Veterinary Medicine found that bovine mammary gland tissue held receptors for the avian influenza virus, offering a potential explanation for how cattle are being infected. Todd Bell, a professor of veterinary pathology and co-author of the study, said the idea to look at mammary glands as a potential entry point for the virus came after it was identified in raw milk. Two ISU alums in the spring identified an illness impacting cattle in Texas as avian flu, and ever since different teams at the university and in partnerships with other organizations have been working to tackle the virus and its spread from different angles. “They really answered the ‘what,’ what was actually going on, what was making these cattle sick, which is a new and novel finding, and then our job, really, at that point as researchers was to understand the ‘why,’” Bell said. “We’ve never seen this before. Why is this happening?” GET THE MORNING HEADLINES. SUBSCRIBE To understand the concept, Bell suggested thinking of viruses as like keys, and receptors are like locks to cells. In order for the avian flu virus to enter a cell and reproduce, it needs the right receptor. The research team found that receptor on cattle mammary glands. Another receptor they found is connected to human influenza, Bell said, which is important because it opens up the possibility of a cell being infected by both viruses, potentially causing the creation of a new virus. “To our knowledge, that hasn’t happened yet in this particular outbreak, but we wanted to look for those receptors to understand what might be possible and hopefully stop the transmission and stop that from happening,” Bell said. The team also looked at the respiratory system to try and identify evidence of the bird flu, but found little there, narrowing down the possibilities of how cattle are being infected. According to the American Veterinary Medical Association, as of July 12 the avian influenza had been detected in dairy herds in 12 states, including 13 herds in Iowa. While the virus is being detected in raw milk, the pasteurization process ensures it is safe to be consumed. Research may inform preventative policies While Bell and his colleague’s work is still very much focused on the “why” of avian flu in dairy herds and its spread, he said the hope is that their research will help inform regulators in making decisions on testing and biosecurity measures to try and stop the spread of the virus. He said there is some literature that states the virus can live on milking machines for a few hours after an infected cow is hooked up to them, offering one potential method of spread. “We hope that what we find will help them make those types of decisions, specifically if we can find it in mammary tissue, then how do we stop it from getting to that mammary tissue in the first place,” Bell said. Next steps for Bell and his colleagues include looking at the milk and mammary glands of other domestic animals, like sheep and goats, to see if they also carry receptors for the avian flu. Bell said they will also look at their respiratory systems and gastrointestinal tracts to see if the flu could have other points of entry, like if a wild bird with the virus defecates into a water supply and farm animals drink the infected water. Iowa Secretary of Agriculture Mike Naig said during “Iowa Press” last week that longitudinal studies are also being conducted on farms to test every single animal housed there in order to track how the virus moves and determine how it exits the herd. “Because it will, it will eventually exit that herd and you want to be able to track those things and have an expectation of how long does that last,” he said during the program. YOU MAKE OUR WORK POSSIBLE. SUPPORT XISU research identifies possible point of entry for avian flu in cattle by Brooklyn Draisey, Iowa Capital Dispatch July 16, 2024 ISU research identifies possible point of entry for avian flu in cattle by Brooklyn Draisey, Iowa Capital Dispatch July 16, 2024 As avian influenza is being detected in more and more dairy herds across the U.S., Iowa State University researchers have found a possible “why” connection to the virus being found in raw milk. A study published this month by a team in ISU’s College of Veterinary Medicine found that bovine mammary gland tissue held receptors for the avian influenza virus, offering a potential explanation for how cattle are being infected. Todd Bell, a professor of veterinary pathology and co-author of the study, said the idea to look at mammary glands as a potential entry point for the virus came after it was identified in raw milk. Two ISU alums in the spring identified an illness impacting cattle in Texas as avian flu, and ever since different teams at the university and in partnerships with other organizations have been working to tackle the virus and its spread from different angles. “They really answered the ‘what,’ what was actually going on, what was making these cattle sick, which is a new and novel finding, and then our job, really, at that point as researchers was to understand the ‘why,’” Bell said. “We’ve never seen this before. Why is this happening?” GET THE MORNING HEADLINES. SUBSCRIBE To understand the concept, Bell suggested thinking of viruses as like keys, and receptors are like locks to cells. In order for the avian flu virus to enter a cell and reproduce, it needs the right receptor. The research team found that receptor on cattle mammary glands. Another receptor they found is connected to human influenza, Bell said, which is important because it opens up the possibility of a cell being infected by both viruses, potentially causing the creation of a new virus. “To our knowledge, that hasn’t happened yet in this particular outbreak, but we wanted to look for those receptors to understand what might be possible and hopefully stop the transmission and stop that from happening,” Bell said. The team also looked at the respiratory system to try and identify evidence of the bird flu, but found little there, narrowing down the possibilities of how cattle are being infected. According to the American Veterinary Medical Association, as of July 12 the avian influenza had been detected in dairy herds in 12 states, including 13 herds in Iowa. While the virus is being detected in raw milk, the pasteurization process ensures it is safe to be consumed. Research may inform preventative policies While Bell and his colleague’s work is still very much focused on the “why” of avian flu in dairy herds and its spread, he said the hope is that their research will help inform regulators in making decisions on testing and biosecurity measures to try and stop the spread of the virus. He said there is some literature that states the virus can live on milking machines for a few hours after an infected cow is hooked up to them, offering one potential method of spread. “We hope that what we find will help them make those types of decisions, specifically if we can find it in mammary tissue, then how do we stop it from getting to that mammary tissue in the first place,” Bell said. Next steps for Bell and his colleagues include looking at the milk and mammary glands of other domestic animals, like sheep and goats, to see if they also carry receptors for the avian flu. Bell said they will also look at their respiratory systems and gastrointestinal tracts to see if the flu could have other points of entry, like if a wild bird with the virus defecates into a water supply and farm animals drink the infected water. Iowa Secretary of Agriculture Mike Naig said during “Iowa Press” last week that longitudinal studies are also being conducted on farms to test every single animal housed there in order to track how the virus moves and determine how it exits the herd. “Because it will, it will eventually exit that herd and you want to be able to track those things and have an expectation of how long does that last,” he said during the program. YOU MAKE OUR WORK POSSIBLE. SUPPORT Iowa Capital Dispatch is part of States Newsroom, a nonprofit news network supported by grants and a coalition of donors as a 501c(3) public charity. Iowa Capital Dispatch maintains editorial independence. Contact Editor Kathie Obradovich for questions: info@iowacapitaldispatch.com. Follow Iowa Capital Dispatch on Facebook and X. View Republishing Guidelines Copy to clipboard 1Republish Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. AP and Getty images may not be republished. Please see our republishing guidelines for use of any other photos and graphics. Brooklyn DraiseyBrooklyn Draisey is a Report for America corps member covering higher education. She previously worked for the Quad-City Times and The Gazette covering topics ranging from business to culture.Iowa Capital Dispatch is part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization.MORE FROM AUTHOR Related News Drake University announces full-tuition financial aid…by Brooklyn DraiseyNovember 11, 2024 University of Iowa launches council for veterans and…by Brooklyn DraiseyNovember 8, 2024 Iowa Board of Regents optimistic about future enrollmentby Brooklyn DraiseyNovember 7, 2024 Community journalism for democracy Democracy Toolkit // Register to Vote | Find Your Precinct | Find Your State Legislator | Contact Your U.S. Representative | Contact Your U.S. Senator DEMOCRACY TOOLKIT Register to VoteFind Your PrecinctFind Your State LegislatorContact Your U.S. RepresentativeContact Your U.S. Senator © Iowa Capital Dispatch, 2024 v1.59.8 ABOUT US Iowans value integrity in their government. Free and independent journalism is what keeps our public servants accountable and responsive to the people. That’s why Iowa Capital Dispatch, a nonprofit, independent source for quality journalism, is working every day to keep you informed about what government officials are doing with your money, your freedom and your safety. We’re part of States Newsroom, the nation’s largest state-focused nonprofit news organization. DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy Our stories may be republished online or in print under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. We ask that you edit only for style or to shorten, provide proper attribution and link to our website. (See full republishing guidelines.) DEIJ Policy | Ethics Policy | Privacy Policy © Iowa Capital Dispatch, 2024 v1.59.8 States Newsroom Fair. Fearless. Free.5 human cases of bird flu in Colorado poultry workers, health officials report - CBS News Latest U.S. World America Decides Election 2024 Senate Election Results House Election Results Politics Entertainment HealthWatch MoneyWatch Crime Space Sports Local News Baltimore Bay Area Boston Chicago Colorado Detroit Los Angeles Miami Minnesota New York Philadelphia Pittsburgh Sacramento Texas Live CBS News 24/7 Baltimore Bay Area Boston Chicago Colorado Detroit Los Angeles Miami Minnesota New York Philadelphia Pittsburgh Sacramento Texas 48 Hours 60 Minutes Shows 48 Hours 60 Minutes America Decides CBS Evening News CBS Mornings CBS News Mornings CBS Reports CBS Saturday Morning The Daily Report The Dish Eye on America Face the Nation Here Comes the Sun Person to Person Sunday Morning The Takeout The Uplift Weekender CBS News Investigates CBS Village Podcasts In Depth Newsletters Download Our App CBS News Team Executive Team Brand Studio Paramount Shop Paramount+ Join Our Talent Community RSS Feeds A Moment With... Innovators & Disruptors Economy 4.0 U.S. America Decides Election 2024 World Politics HealthWatch MoneyWatch Entertainment Crime Sports Watch CBS News U.S. 5 human cases of bird flu in Colorado poultry workers, health officials report By Faris Tanyos, Sara Moniuszko Updated on: July 15, 2024 / 10:30 AM EDT / CBS News What to know about human cases of bird flu What to know about the human cases of bird flu case detected so far 03:26 Five poultry workers from a farm in northeast Colorado have bird flu, state and federal health officials reported Sunday. Four of the cases have been confirmed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and one is presumptively positive for H5N1, also known as avian influenza, and is pending confirmation.The disease was contracted while working at a "commercial egg layer operation," the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment said in a statement Sunday.On Friday, when only three cases were confirmed, the CDC said they worked "at a poultry facility experiencing an outbreak of the H5N1 virus that is circulating in wild birds and has been causing multistate outbreaks in dairy cows and poultry." Bird flu symptomsThe five workers were culling poultry at the farm when they showed mild symptoms, including pink eye and common respiratory infections, state officials said in Sunday's update. None required hospitalization.Symptoms among the new bird flu cases included "fever, chills, coughing and sore throatunny nose," alongside pink eye and eye tearing, a CDC spokesperson confirmed Monday. Other bird flu casesThere have been four confirmed human cases of bird flu in the U.S. since March, all in farmworkers, with two in Michigan, one in Texas and one in Colorado, the CDC said. In the latter case, a Northern Colorado farm worker suffered pink eye after having direct contact with cattle that were infected with avian flu, CDPHE previously reported. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, there have been bird flu outbreaks confirmed in 152 cattle herds so far this year. The CDC said the risk to the public from bird flu remains low, noting that "there are no signs of unexpected increases in flu activity otherwise in Colorado, or in other states affected by H5 bird flu outbreaks in cows and poultry." However, it added that "human infections with this novel influenza virus (and others) are concerning because of the potential to cause severe disease."Federal officials are considering if and when to deploy 4.8 million doses of bird flu vaccine. Finland announced last month it would offer shots to workers who might be exposed to the virus.— Alexander Tin contributed to this report. More from CBS News Airplane returns to airport after takeoff after hitting a bird, catching on fire Qatar decides to suspend mediation efforts in Gaza, officials say 25 of 43 escaped monkeys recovered safely at South Carolina lab Trump says Haley, Pompeo won't be invited to join White House In: Colorado Bird Flu Faris Tanyos Faris Tanyos is a news editor for CBSNews.com, where he writes and edits stories and tracks breaking news. He previously worked as a digital news producer at several local news stations up and down the West Coast. © 2024 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved. More from CBS News Airplane returns to airport after takeoff after hitting a bird, catching on fire Qatar decides to suspend mediation efforts in Gaza, officials say 25 of 43 escaped monkeys recovered safely at South Carolina lab Trump says Haley, Pompeo won't be invited to join White House Copyright ©2024 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy California Notice Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms of Use About Advertise Closed Captioning CBS News Store Site Map Contact Us Help facebook twitter instagram youtube View CBS News In CBS News App Open Chrome Safari Continue Be the first to know Get browser notifications for breaking news, live events, and exclusive reporting. Not Now Turn OnWhat scientists know about bird flu symptoms from the first 9 U.S. human casesIE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser.Skip to ContentNBC News Logo2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsShare & Save —My NewsManage ProfileEmail PreferencesSign OutSearchSearchProfile My NewsSign Out Sign InCreate your free profileSectionsU.S. NewsDecision 2024PoliticsWorldLocalBusinessSportsInvestigationsCulture & TrendsHealthScienceTech & MediaWeatherVideo FeaturesPhotosNBC SelectNBC Asian AmericaNBC BLKNBC LatinoNBC OUTtvTodayNightly NewsMSNBCMeet the PressDatelineFeaturedNBC News NowNightly FilmsStay TunedSpecial FeaturesNewslettersPodcastsListen NowMore From NBCCNBCNBC.COMNBCU AcademyPeacockNEXT STEPS FOR VETSNBC News Site MapHelpFollow NBC News news AlertsThere are no new alerts at this timeSearchSearchFacebookTwitterEmailSMSPrintWhatsappRedditPocketFlipboardPinterestLinkedinLatest Stories2024 ElectionU.S. NewsWorldBusinessSportsHealthScienceShoppingTiplineCulture & TrendsHealth newsWhat the 9 human cases of bird flu in the U.S. so far tell us about the diseaseThe illnesses, all in farm workers, have been relatively mild — a contrast to the flu’s deadly effect on many birds and some mammals.The cases stem from a global outbreak of H5N1, a particular strain of bird flu that took off in 2020.Daniel Acker / Bloomberg via Getty Images fileJuly 18, 2024, 10:30 AM UTCBy Aria BendixThe SummaryFour poultry workers in Colorado recently contracted bird flu, bringing the total of U.S. human cases to nine.The infections, nearly all of which have been reported since April, are giving experts a preliminary sense of what the disease looks like in people.The cases have been fairly mild, with some typical flu symptoms and several reports of pink eye. Four poultry workers in Colorado who recently contracted bird flu bring the total of human cases in the U.S. to at least nine. Though that number is small, disease researchers say commonalities between the cases — all but one of which were reported in the last four months — are enough to start assembling a picture of how the virus may affect people. The U.S. cases have been relatively mild and limited to farm workers who had handled infected animals — a sign that the virus in its current state isn’t a major threat to humans. Some patients have reported typical flu symptoms such as fever, chills, cough, sore throat or runny nose. Many have had conjunctivitis or pink eye.“One thing that we can conclude is that the current strain of the virus isn’t well adapted for human infection, and may not even be well adapted for infecting the lower respiratory tract,” said Matthew Binnicker, director of the Clinical Virology Laboratory at the Mayo Clinic.The cases stem from a global outbreak of H5N1, a particular strain of bird flu that took off in 2020 and has hit poultry and dairy farms in the U.S. The country’s first human case was reported in April 2022, in a prison inmate who had culled birds at a farm in Colorado and whose only symptom was fatigue. Texas reported the second case in April, followed by two in Michigan and five in Colorado — the four most recent of which were confirmed over the weekend.The cases' mild nature stands in contrast to the flu’s effect on birds and some mammals — including seals, sea lions, foxes, skunks and cats — that have died from the virus. Since January 2022, more than 99 million wild aquatic birds, commercial poultry and backyard flocks in the U.S. have been affected, which means they either died of the virus or were culled to prevent further transmission. And roughly 160 dairy cow herds have been struck since the virus was first detected in cows in March. This H5N1 strain is considered highly pathogenic, a term that, when used in the context of bird flu, means it has a high potential to kill chickens. Hearing about such a virus “really scares people, but that term is really a USDA term for what happens in poultry,” said John Lednicky, a research professor of environmental and global health at the University of Florida. “Just because it’s highly pathogenic in birds doesn’t mean it’s highly pathogenic in mammals or humans.”Lednicky added that some strains of H5N1 are deadly in humans, while others are not.Of the more than 900 total cases of H5N1 strains in people reported globally since 1997, around half have been fatal. But in the last two years, the global mortality rate has been lower: around 27%. And even then, those numbers largely reflect just the people who were sick enough to seek treatment.Dr. Peter Palese, a microbiology professor at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, said patients in that tally are those who’ve “been hospitalized and who, in retrospect, have been in contact with large amounts of virus.”Palese’s 2012 research, which examined blood samples from 12,500 people without a documented bird flu infection, found that 1% to 2% of them may have previously been infected with H5N1.Experts still worry, though, that the virus could someday mutate into a version that causes more severe disease or that spreads from person to person. (So far, all transmission has been from animals to humans.)“The concern is that as more animals are infected, and then more people are infected, the virus will change,” Binnicker said.Why is pink eye associated with bird flu?Of the nine U.S. bird flu patients, seven reported pink eye.That includes all four of the recent cases in Colorado, which were linked to an outbreak at a commercial farm in Weld County. The workers had been culling poultry. The state reported earlier this month that another patient there, a dairy worker who had been exposed to infected cattle, also developed pink eye. A dairy worker in Texas developed pinkeye when he got bird flu.New England Journal of MedicineTexas’ one case involved conjunctivitis without other symptoms. That person worked with dairy cows and developed redness and discomfort in their right eye in March. According to a case study in the New England Journal of Medicine, the person reported wearing gloves but no eye protection on the job.Conjunctivitis isn’t the most common symptom of bird flu in humans, but it has been documented in some people infected with different strains, such as in a 2003 outbreak of H7N7 in the Netherlands. Scientists said a few factors could explain the symptom’s recent prevalence. One is that farm workers aren’t consistently covering their eyes when dealing with sick animals. As a result, dairy workers could get raw milk — which has been shown to carry the virus — in their eyes.That’s likely what happened to a dairy worker in Michigan who developed mild conjunctivitis and was confirmed to have bird flu in May. The virus may also enter people’s eyes through respiratory droplets or aerosols (tiny airborne droplets). Or, some workers could have touched their eyes after handling infected animals or contaminated raw milk.“The receptor on the cells that the virus needs to bind to is pretty prevalent in cells in the eye, and that could be one explanation as to why we’re seeing conjunctivitis in individuals infected with avian flu,” Binnicker said.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends treating people with bird flu with antivirals. Some of the U.S. patients have received Tamiflu, a drug also used to treat seasonal influenza. “The studies that have been done so far have shown that Tamiflu is effective at treating the currently circulating strain of avian influenza,” Binnicker said. “It usually needs to get administered within 48 hours of symptom onset to be most effective.”More spread, more testing, more casesThe reason that all but one of the U.S. cases have been reported since April, scientists say, may come down to two factors. First, the virus is spreading at a rapid clip among birds and sporadically infecting other animals, such as domestic cats, thereby increasing the odds of human exposure. Second, health departments have started monitoring and testing people exposed to infected animals if they develop symptoms.The CDC estimates that at least 10,600 people have been monitored for bird flu and at least 375 have been tested since the outbreak in commercial poultry started in 2022.“There probably is a much higher amount of virus out there today compared to a year ago, but we’re also picking up more cases because we’re testing more,” Binnicker said.Dr. Natasha Bagdasarian, chief medical executive for the state of Michigan, said local health departments there have been screening for even the faintest of symptoms.“I think that’s why we’re seeing the mild cases,” she said. “It’s because of this active symptom monitoring that we’re doing.”The Michigan worker who had conjunctivitis, for instance, didn’t even seek out a doctor before being tested for bird flu. Michigan’s other case was a farmworker working with infected cows, who reported a sore throat, cough and congestion to local health officials.Bagdasarian said the fact that Michigan has only seen two cases after testing roughly 60 people suggests humans need lots of exposure to get sick. The workers who tested positive also weren’t wearing full personal protective equipment and had been involved in tasks like milking cows or administering fluids to them, she said.“We’re not talking about folks who had transient contact with these animals, who walked past a barn or a pen,” Bagdasarian said. “We’re not talking about people who just touched a cow once.”Aria BendixAria Bendix is the breaking health reporter for NBC News Digital.AboutContactHelpCareersAd ChoicesPrivacy PolicyYour Privacy ChoicesCA NoticeTerms of Service (Updated JULY 7, 2023)NBC News SitemapClosed CaptioningAdvertiseSelect ShoppingSelect Personal Finance© 2024 NBCUniversal Media, LLCNBC News LogoMSNBC LogoToday LogoChicken culling, disposal raise concern as avian influenza spreads | The Poultry Site About us Contact us Advertise with us Events Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino Europe Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania Menu Home Genetics & breeding Egg layers Meat poultry Health & disease Processing Equipment & innovation Markets & policy Knowledge centre Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania About us Contact us Advertise with us Events Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino Europe Africa South America North America Asia Oceania How can we help you? esc All Articles Sponsors Events Biosecurity Treatments and prevention Avian influenza Chicken culling, disposal raise concern as avian influenza spreads Infected carcasses pose a risk to humans and livestock 19 July 2024 4 minute read By: Global Ag Media North America The spread of avian influenza among poultry and dairy farms has heightened some health experts' concerns that the process of killing and disposing of poultry infected with the virus may pose a risk to humans and livestock, reported Reuters. Recent instances of farms dumping carcasses in landfills and using methods to kill chickens that put workers in close proximity to the virus show how the process of getting rid of infected birds could further spread the disease, according to data obtained by Reuters and interviews with officials and disease experts. Extreme heat that made it difficult to keep protective equipment on during the asphyxiation by carbon dioxide of chickens on a Colorado egg farm likely contributed to five bird flu cases among workers, the largest cluster of human cases in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention said this week. The situation highlights the need for systematic use of protective gear when killing the sick animals, said the CDC's Principal Deputy Director Nirav Shah on a Tuesday call with reporters about the outbreak. Workers killing chickens risk inhaling the virus, said Dr. Michael Osterholm, an infectious disease expert at the University of Minnesota, of the process. The workers had mild symptoms including pink eye and respiratory issues. "Depopulation activities need to clearly focus on protection for these individuals," he said. So far, there have been no human or livestock cases linked directly to disposal of animals with avian flu. Colorado's case Bird flu has migrated to nearly every US state over the past 2.5 years. There have been nine cases among poultry and dairy workers since March, including the Colorado poultry workers. Further bird flu spread among livestock could increase the likelihood of human infections, though the risk to the general public is still low, officials from the CDC have said. About 95 million chickens, turkeys, and other poultry have been killed and disposed of since February 2022, according to US Department of Agriculture data obtained by Reuters showing culling and disposal methods through late June. Bird flu is fatal in birds and the government requires entire flocks to be culled once the virus is on a farm. The deadliest year was 2022, but nearly as many chickens have been disposed of so far in 2024 as in all of 2023, the data shows. The sick workers in Colorado, for instance, were killing the birds with mobile gas chamber carts, said Julie Gauthier, an official at USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, on the Tuesday call. The carts can typically accommodate between a dozen and 50 birds and workers asphyxiate them batch by batch, Gauthier said. A USDA spokesperson said the agency had reviewed the farm's use of the method as part of its response to the outbreak. More than 150 of the workers were exposed to infected poultry, 69 displayed symptoms and were tested, and five were positive, said AnneMarie Harper, communications director at the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. Most chickens are killed by asphyxiation either with portable chambers like those used in Colorado, or by spraying a firefighting foam on the birds or shutting down ventilation to the chicken barns, the USDA data shows. A small number are killed with firearms, by cervical dislocation, or other means. Disposing of the dead Most of the culled birds are composted, either in chicken houses or on farms, or buried, according to the USDA data. To compost the birds, farmers cover them in material like wood shavings, maintain the compost piles at a high temperature, and stir them occasionally with farm equipment in a process that typically takes several weeks. Federal and state officials work with farmers to determine the best disposal methods, said John Clifford, a former USDA chief veterinarian, now an advisor for the USA Poultry and Egg Export Council, an industry group. It is safest to compost on site to avoid moving the carcasses and potentially spreading the virus, said Myah Walker, compliance unit supervisor at the Minnesota Board of Animal Health. In rarer cases, carcasses are transported to landfills, a process that can meet some federal and state regulations. Michigan egg producer Herbruck's Poultry Ranch disposed of nearly 2 million chickens between April 15 and June 8 in private landfills, according to USDA data and Michigan state records of the disposal process obtained by Reuters. Herbruck's declined to comment. Just 3% of all poultry have been disposed of in landfills since 2022, and the Herbruck's outbreak accounts for about two-thirds of them, the USDA data shows. Soon after the Herbruck's disposal, a dairy farm near one of the landfills tested positive for bird flu, alarming area farmers. Even so, whole genome sequencing showed the disposed Herbruck's carcasses did not cause the infection, said Adeline Hambley, Ottawa County's health officer. Wild birds have helped spread the virus between poultry farms and to other species. Brian Hoefs, the state veterinarian for Minnesota, said he would not recommend disposing of dead poultry in landfills. "That's the restaurant for scavengers. It would be a recipe for disaster," he said. Our Partners Targan Lallemand Lanxess BioZyme Hy-Line International Global Ag Media More from this author More News View all China set for record soybean imports in 2024 Markets & policy Market trends Feed Markets 7 November 2024 2 minute read ForFarmers' UK poultry mill deal with Boparan could harm competition Markets & policy 7 November 2024 2 minute read The acquisition could reduce competition in poultry supply Avian influenza confirmed on UK commercial poultry farm Health & disease Diseases Avian influenza 7 November 2024 1 minute read UK government raises risk status from medium to high Our Partners Targan Lallemand Lanxess BioZyme Hy-Line International Global Ag Media provides a knowledge sharing platform offering premium news, analysis and information resources for the global agriculture industry. Useful Links About us Contact our team Advertise with us Newsletter Terms & Conditions Cookie & Privacy Policy Events Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Sign up to our newsletter esc Email Address Country Country Brazil Canada India Indonesia Kenya Nigeria Philippines South Africa United Kingdom United States Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Congo, The Democratic Republic of The Cook Islands Costa Rica Cote D'ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czechia Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and Mcdonald Islands Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Republic of Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova, Republic of Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and The South Sandwich Islands Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan, Province of China Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Viet Nam Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, U.S. Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Postcode/Zip Code Company Industry Position Opt in to another list The Pig Site The Beef Site The Dairy Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio Porcino I would like to sign up to receive email updates from Global Ag Media Sign up to our regular newsletter and access news from across the Global AG Media network © 2000 - 2024 - Global Ag Media. All Rights Reserved | No part of this site may be reproduced without permission. Our Sites The Poultry Site The Pig Site The Cattle Site The Dairy Site The Beef Site The Meat Site The Crop Site El Sitio Avicola El Sitio PorcinoBird flu virus in cows can still be eliminated, USDA says Skip to Main Content Election 2024 FDA Congress Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now My Account Settings Billing Log Out Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Newsletters Log In My Account Subscribe Now BiotechPharmaPublic HealthHealth TechPolicyScienceFirst OpinionSTAT+STAT Events Search Log In Try STAT+ My Account Home News Latest Business Biotech Pharma Health Tech Health Insurance Hospitals Medical Devices Washington Policy FDA CDC NIH Science CRISPR Gene Therapy Research Neuroscience Public Health H5N1 Bird Flu Addiction Covid-19 Abortion Health Disparities Infectious Disease Mental Health Disease Cancer Cardiovascular Disease Chronic Disease Diabetes Alzheimer's Obesity Features Coercive Care The Obesity Revolution The War on Recovery Newsletters Opinion Columns Adam Feuerstein Matthew Herper Ed Silverman Reports E-books Podcasts Tools & Trackers CRISPR Tracker Breakthrough Device Tracker Generative AI Tracker Obesity Drug Tracker Events Upcoming Events Summits 2025 Breakthrough East 2025 Breakthrough West Community STAT Wunderkinds '24 STAT Madness Video Advertise STAT Brand Studio Don't miss out Subscribe to STAT+ today, for the best life sciences journalism in the industry Learn more HealthUSDA maintains bird flu can be eliminated from dairy cows, even as doubts mount among experts By Andrew Joseph July 16, 2024 Reprints Rich Pedroncelli/AP Facing increasing doubts that the U.S. can control the outbreak of avian influenza among dairy cattle, federal officials reiterated on Tuesday that they believe the country can still eliminate the H5N1 virus from dairy cows, even as it continues to spread to new herds. “All the signs that we have are, with good biosecurity, with good farmer participation, we will be able to eliminate this,” Eric Deeble, the acting senior adviser for the H5N1 response at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, said on a call with reporters.advertisement The reason for that confidence, Deeble said, is that investigations have shown it’s the transport of cows, as well as the shared use of equipment and vehicles, that is spreading the virus. That means that cutting the virus off at those points can contain it, he said, noting that officials have not seen new introductions of the virus to dairy cows from birds since the outbreak started, likely late last year. “We understand that this moves with the cattle and with the people that are closely associated with them, so enhanced biosecurity should get us to a point where we can arrest the spread,” Deeble said. He added that the possible future deployment of an H5 vaccine in cattle — which is an idea that remains under discussion — could “further facilitate the elimination of this disease from the national herd.” Outside experts are increasingly skeptical of that view given the ground the virus continues to gain. They’ve argued that the problems that have impeded the outbreak response from the beginning — from a surveillance system that isn’t keeping up with the spread of the virus to a lack of cooperation from dairy farms — haven’t changed dramatically. And they argue that the longer the virus persists in cattle, the more likely it is that it could mutate in such a way that would make it more transmissible among people.advertisement The USDA has started providing more resources to farms with infected cows, which could improve the willingness of dairy farms to test their animals. But experts still believe that the poor tracking of the virus — officially, more than 155 herds in 13 states have reported infections, though it’s widely presumed that both numbers are undercounts — means officials don’t know the scale of the outbreak or all the herds that are affected. Surveys have also shown that farmers have continued to move cows even after they have shown signs of disease. “There are no clear signs that the outbreak is or is about to come under control,” a report from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health last month stated, adding that “the probability of … persistent chains of infection is considered high.” Related: Despite bird flu anxiety in the dairy barn, a yearly tradition carries on at an Iowa county fair Deeble’s remarks came as health and agricultural officials provided an update on a cluster of human H5N1 cases in Colorado. The five cases (four are confirmed, one is still considered presumptive) were among people who were involved in culling birds at a poultry farm with an H5N1 outbreak in Colorado’s Weld County. But the available evidence suggests that the virus possibly reached the 1.8-million bird poultry farm from an infected dairy herd. On the press call, officials noted that there have been infected dairy herds in Weld County. They also said that a genetic sequence from one of the human cases indicated that the virus was related to the version that’s spreading among cows. Notably, the genetic sequence of a key component of the virus — the hemagglutinin subunit — was an exact match to the hemagglutinin sequences from two earlier human cases tied to the dairy outbreak, officials said. “That does raise the possibility that this virus was transmitted from a dairy herd in Colorado to the poultry farm,” Nirav Shah, the principal deputy director at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told reporters. “That is a hypothesis. It is a hypothesis that needs and requires a full investigation. But that is a hypothesis at this point.” The five Colorado cases were all mild, Shah said. The people had different symptoms, with some experiencing the more traditional flu signs of fever and cough, and others having conjunctivitis, a symptom that’s been seen with some of the dairy workers who’ve been infected during the outbreak. Related: Bird flu snapshot: As the number of infected dairy herds mount, so too does pessimism about driving H5N1 out of cows The human cases also underscored some of the challenges authorities face in seeking to prevent spread from animals to people. Health officials have been urging dairy workers to wear personal protective equipment in milking parlors, for example, given the sky-high levels of virus in cows’ udders and their milk. But milking parlors can be hot and stuffy, meaning it’s not comfortable or feasible to wear masks and goggles. Workers involved in culling poultry with H5N1 outbreaks — “depopulation” in the parlance of agricultural officials — are meant to wear full PPE, from boots to suits to masks and goggles. But officials noted that when the culling was taking place, it was over 100 degrees in Colorado. Moreover, the industrial fans that were meant to cool down the barns where the culling was taking place were so strong that workers had a hard time keeping their masks and goggles sealed to their faces. Plus, the fans were whipping up birds’ feathers, which can carry the virus. The culling method used on this farm — which requires workers to pick up chickens and place them in a cart where they are euthanized with carbon dioxide — also meant there was lots of contact with the birds, officials said. “We understand that PPE use was not optimal, particularly the masks and the eye protection,” Shah said. He added, however, that “these factors do highlight a pathway to prevention,” with better engineering and PPE use possibly able to avoid future cases. About the Author Reprints Andrew Joseph Europe Correspondent Andrew Joseph covers health, medicine, and the biopharma industry in Europe. [email protected] @DrewQJoseph Tags H5N1 Bird Flu infectious disease public health To submit a correction request, please visit our Contact Us page. Trending Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug… Compounding group sues FDA for removing Lilly’s obesity drug from its shortages list White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid… White House should declare national emergency over IV fluid shortages caused by Helene, says hospital group With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two… With boost from RFK Jr. and Tucker Carlson, two chronic disease entrepreneurs vault into Trump’s orbit Recommended A STAT Investigation: Pain, loss, and coercive care A STAT Investigation: Pain, loss, and coercive care Cardiovascular health disparities persist in puzzling ways, studies find Cardiovascular health disparities persist in puzzling ways, studies find What the Trump administration could mean for the health… What the Trump administration could mean for the health care industry, from hospitals to pharma Recommended Stories Pharmalot Ed Silverman STAT Plus: Pharmalittle: We’re reading about GSK leaving BIO, an AbbVie schizophrenia drug failing, and more Biotech Elaine Chen STAT Plus: Schizophrenia drug AbbVie picked up in $9 billion acquisition fails in key trials advertisement Who to Know Isabella Cueto STAT Plus: ‘MAHA’ is moving into Trump’s White House. Here’s who RFK Jr. could bring along for the ride Politics Lizzy Lawrence STAT Plus: What letting RFK Jr. ‘go wild’ might mean for Trump’s FDA Biotech Allison DeAngelis, Matthew Herper, Andrew Joseph, Jason Mast, and Ed Silverman STAT Plus: Biotech and pharma executives on what Trump and RFK Jr. could mean for the industry Reporting from the frontiers of health and medicine Back to top Company About Our Team Contact Us Careers Diversity & Inclusion Our Awards Advertise With Us STAT Brand Studio Supporters Licensing Stories Account STAT+ Group Subscriptions FAQ My Account Log In Subscribe More Events Newsletters Reports App Podcasts Community Privacy Comment Policy Terms Do Not Sell My Data ©2024 STATStudy finds dairy cows vulnerable to flu strains from birds, humans, and pigs Skip to content Menu Medical Home Life Sciences Home Become a Member Search Medical Home Life Sciences Home About COVID-19 News Health A-Z Drugs Medical Devices Interviews White Papers More... MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Diet & Nutrition Artificial Intelligence Allergies Alzheimer's & Dementia Arthritis & Rheumatology Breast Cancer Cold, Flu & Cough Eating Disorders Eye Health Gastrointestinal Health Heart Disease High Blood Pressure Lung Cancer Mental Health Mpox Pregnancy Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Sexual Health Sleep View Health A-Z ×Top Health Categories Coronavirus Disease COVID-19 Heart Disease Diet & Nutrition High Blood Pressure Artificial Intelligence Lung Cancer Allergies Mental Health Alzheimer's & Dementia Mpox Arthritis & Rheumatology Pregnancy Breast Cancer Type 1 Diabetes Cold, Flu & Cough Type 2 Diabetes Eating Disorders Sexual Health Eye Health Sleep Gastrointestinal Health View Health A-Z Medical Home Life Sciences Home About News Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Lab Equipment Interviews Newsletters Webinars More... eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member White Papers MediKnowledge Newsletters Health & Personal Care eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Webinars eBooks Contact Meet the Team Advertise Search Become a Member Study finds dairy cows vulnerable to flu strains from birds, humans, and pigs Download PDF Copy By Vijay Kumar MalesuReviewed by Danielle Ellis, B.Sc.Jul 18 2024 In a recent study published in Emerging Infectious Diseases, a group of researchers compared the distribution of sialic acid (SA) receptors in the respiratory tract and mammary glands of dairy cattle naturally infected with the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A(H5N1) virus (highly contagious and deadly avian influenza virus strain H5N1). Study: Sialic Acid Receptor Specificity in Mammary Gland of Dairy Cattle Infected with Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus. Image Credit: Simon Kadula/Shutterstock.com Background In March 2024, the United States (US) Department of Agriculture reported the first detection of HPAI H5N1 virus in dairy cattle in the US. The presence of specific virus receptors on host cells influences the susceptibility to HPAI H5N1 infection. Still, the distribution of SA receptors in dairy cattle, particularly in mammary glands, remains poorly understood. Further research is needed to clarify the mechanisms of HPAI H5N1 transmission and persistence in dairy cattle and its implications for public health and the dairy industry. About the study In March 2024, two adult Holstein dairy cows in Texas, were diagnosed with HPAI H5N1 virus infection at the Iowa State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory. The cows exhibited symptoms including reduced lactation and yellow, thickened milk. The diagnosis was confirmed through real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry in the mammary glands and lungs. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue sections of trachea, lung, and mammary gland tissues, as well as milk samples, were collected for further analysis. Tissue sections were verified to be positive for the Influenza A virus (IAV) matrix gene nucleic acid using an RNA In Situ Hybridization Assay (RNAscope), and both macroscopic and microscopic lesions were tested using IAV chromogenic immunohistochemistry and rRT-PCR. Milk samples were cytocentrifuged and stained with a modified Wright stain for cytologic evaluation. Differential cell counts were determined under ×1,000 magnification by counting 100 nucleated cells. For receptor characterization, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded mammary gland sections were prepared and stained using a dual lectin and immunochemistry staining method. The staining process involved incubating sections with specific lectins and streptavidin conjugated with Alexa Fluor 647, followed by immunostaining with influenza A nucleoprotein (IAV-Np). Multicolor immunofluorescent staining was performed using antibodies against cytokeratin and Ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1) (macrophage marker). The slides were examined and imaged using an Olympus trinocular microscope equipped with a DP23 camera and CellSyns Dimension software. Negative controls consisted of primary lectin or antibody omission, and positive controls were performed on porcine tissues and known IAV-infected porcine lung tissue. Study results Two naturally infected lactating Holstein dairy cows with HPAI H5N1 virus infections were selected for retrospective evaluation. The cows exhibited clinicopathologic manifestations, and their infection was confirmed through previously reported detection methods and sequencing data. Related StoriesReview highlights failures in global control strategies for bird flu transmissionStudy reveals how COVID-19 affected the spread and evolution of seasonal influenzaH5N1 bird flu is mutating fast and jumping to mammals - could the next pandemic be here?Histological examination of the mammary gland revealed acute moderate multifocal mastitis characterized by epithelial attenuation and intraluminal neutrophilic inflammation. Immunohistochemistry for IAV-Np in the mammary gland showed intranuclear and intracytoplasmic immunoreactivity in alveolar and interlobular ductal epithelial cells. Cytologic evaluation of milk from the affected gland found moderate to marked neutrophilic and mild macrophagic inflammation consistent with mastitis. The study aimed to evaluate the distribution of SA α2-3 and α2-6 receptors in the respiratory and mammary tissues of the infected cows using fluorescent and chromogenic-based lectin histochemistry. Sambucus nigra agglutinin (SNA) (a lectin that binds specifically to sialic acid linked α2,6 to galactose or N-acetylgalactosamine) labeling was observed in submucosal glands, goblet cells, and intraepithelial and lamina proprial immune cells of the trachea and bronchi. Maackia amurensis lectin I (MAL-I) (a lectin that binds specifically to sialic acid linked α2,3 to galactose) and MAL-II labeling was weak to moderate, multifocal, and observed in the respiratory epithelium of the trachea. In the mammary gland, MAL-II and SNA labeling were expressed in unaffected secretory alveoli, with SNA also observed in unaffected interlobular ducts. No detectable MAL-I or IAV-Np labeling was observed in unaffected mammary gland sections. Fluorescent labeling provided more definitive sensitivity and localization compared to chromogenic, lectin-based assays. In the infected mammary gland, pancytokeratin (epithelial marker) and Iba1 were used to evaluate intracellular distribution of IAV-Np. Co-labeling of IAV-Np with pancytokeratin was observed in cells lining the interlobular ducts and secretory alveoli, with more intense labeling in the alveolar epithelium. Intraluminal cells within secretory alveoli and ducts exhibited both intranuclear and cytoplasmic IAV-Np expression, commonly labeled with pancytokeratin and rare Iba1-positive cells. Intranuclear IAV-Np labeling co-localized with MAL-II and SNA in epithelial cells lining the secretory alveoli. Co-labeling of IAV-Np and SNA was also observed in ductal epithelial cells, while MAL-II was not detected in ducts. MAL-I labeling was not found in the secretory ducts or alveoli, precluding its detection with IAV-Np. Conclusions To summarize, the presence of HPAI H5N1 virus in cattle, especially in the mammary gland and milk, highlights the adaptability of IAV to nontraditional species and the need for active surveillance. IAVs utilize specific SA receptors for host infection. Avian IAVs prefer SA α2,3 linkages, while mammalian IAVs, including those from humans and swine, favor SA α2,6 linkages. This study found both types of SA receptors in the respiratory tract and mammary glands of dairy cattle, indicating potential for cross-species infection. Journal reference: Nelli RK, Harm TA, Siepker C, et al. Sialic Acid Receptor Specificity in Mammary Gland of Dairy Cattle Infected with Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Virus. Emerging Infectious Diseases. (2024). doi:10.3201/eid3007.240689 https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/30/7/24-0689_article Posted in: Medical Science News | Medical Research News Tags: Agriculture, Antibodies, Antibody, Assay, Avian Influenza, Bronchi, Calcium, Cell, Diagnostic, Flu, Fluorescent Labeling, Gene, H5N1, Hybridization, Immunochemistry, Immunohistochemistry, Infectious Diseases, Inflammation, Influenza, Intracellular, Laboratory, Lungs, Macrophage, Magnification, Mammary Gland, Mastitis, Microscope, Molecule, Nucleic Acid, Polymerase, Polymerase Chain Reaction, Public Health, Receptor, Research, Respiratory, RNA, Software, Transcription, Veterinary, Virus Comments (0) Written byVijay Kumar MalesuVijay holds a Ph.D. in Biotechnology and possesses a deep passion for microbiology. His academic journey has allowed him to delve deeper into understanding the intricate world of microorganisms. Through his research and studies, he has gained expertise in various aspects of microbiology, which includes microbial genetics, microbial physiology, and microbial ecology. Vijay has six years of scientific research experience at renowned research institutes such as the Indian Council for Agricultural Research and KIIT University. He has worked on diverse projects in microbiology, biopolymers, and drug delivery. His contributions to these areas have provided him with a comprehensive understanding of the subject matter and the ability to tackle complex research challenges. Download PDF Copy Citations Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:APAKumar Malesu, Vijay. (2024, July 18). Study finds dairy cows vulnerable to flu strains from birds, humans, and pigs. News-Medical. Retrieved on November 12, 2024 from https://www.news-medical.netews/20240718/Study-finds-dairy-cows-vulnerable-to-flu-strains-from-birds-humans-and-pigs.aspx.MLAKumar Malesu, Vijay. "Study finds dairy cows vulnerable to flu strains from birds, humans, and pigs". News-Medical. 12 November 2024. <https://www.news-medical.netews/20240718/Study-finds-dairy-cows-vulnerable-to-flu-strains-from-birds-humans-and-pigs.aspx>.ChicagoKumar Malesu, Vijay. "Study finds dairy cows vulnerable to flu strains from birds, humans, and pigs". News-Medical. https://www.news-medical.netews/20240718/Study-finds-dairy-cows-vulnerable-to-flu-strains-from-birds-humans-and-pigs.aspx. (accessed November 12, 2024).HarvardKumar Malesu, Vijay. 2024. Study finds dairy cows vulnerable to flu strains from birds, humans, and pigs. News-Medical, viewed 12 November 2024, https://www.news-medical.netews/20240718/Study-finds-dairy-cows-vulnerable-to-flu-strains-from-birds-humans-and-pigs.aspx. Suggested Reading Study reveals high effectiveness of flu vaccines in children but highlights challenges with certain subtypesExclusive: Emails reveal how health departments struggle to track human cases of bird fluUniversal flu vaccine candidate provides protection against severe infection in animal modelsH5N1 avian flu found in Texas dairy cattle and milk, sparking concerns about underreported infectionsInnovative nasal spray and vaccine for respiratory virus protectionMacrophage memory following COVID infection provides cross-virus protectionElectronic nudges improve flu vaccination rates in non-diabetic patients but fail to increase uptake in diabeticsGlobal experts gather in Brisbane for scientific meeting dedicated to influenza Comments The opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of News Medical. Cancel reply to comment Post a new comment Login (Logout) Quirky Comment Title Post TrendingStories LatestInterviews Top HealthArticles Traditional Chinese herb shows promise against Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’sBreakthrough research reveals how to target malignant DNA in aggressive cancersAncient herb shows promise in fighting dementiaLink between COVID-19 and long-term risk of autoimmune and autoinflammatory connective tissue disordersCDC updates pain care guidelines for clinicians Exploring the G:Box and for high-quality imaging Dr Martin Biggs In this interview, News Medical speaks with Dr Martin Biggs from Synoptics about Syngene's G:Box, a high-quality imaging and gel documentation system. Shaping the Future of Neuroscience: A Conversation with Atlas Antibodies on the MolBoolean™ and the Impact of SfN 2024 Carolyn Marks and Joel Svensson In this interview, conducted at SfN 2024 in Chicago, News Medical speaks with Joel Svensson and Carolyn Marks of Atlas Antibodies, about their new launch, the MolBoolean™, as well as how conferences like SfN are helping shape the future of neuroscience research. How the Arts Reshape Brain Function: Susan Magsamen on the Future of Neuroaesthetics Susan Magsamen The intersection of arts and neuroscience reveals transformative effects on health and learning, as discussed by Susan Magsamen in her neuroaesthetics research. Why You Might Feel Tired After Drinking CoffeeMythbusting: The 10,000 Steps Per Day TrendCan Magnesium Supplements Help You Sleep Better?Challenges in the Global ADHD Medication Supply ChainHow Does Semaglutide Work to Lose Weight? Latest NewsMethylGPT unlocks DNA secrets for age and disease predictionAI-based ultrasound software guides childbirth decisions with high accuracyRevolutionary AI predicts aging and disease from DNA patternsCannabinol enhances sleep in rats, study showsOvertreatment of older men with prostate cancer raises concerns Newsletters you may be interested in Infectious Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Respiratory Diseases (Subscribe or Preview) Gastroenterology (Subscribe or Preview) See all Newsletters » High Credibility: This website adheres to all nine standards of credibility and transparency. Medical Links Medical Home COVID-19 News Health A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights MediKnowledge Series Health & Personal Care Medical Devices Drugs eBooks Life Sciences Links Life Sciences Home News Lab Instruments & Equipment Life Sciences A-Z White Papers Thought Leaders Insights Webinars eBooks Other Useful Links About Meet the Team Search Newsletters Sitemap Advertise Contact Terms & Conditions Privacy & Cookie Policy Content Policy Ownership & Funding Information Other AZoNetwork Sites AZoM AZoNano AZoCleantech AZoOptics AZoRobotics AZoSensors AZoMining AZoQuantum AZoBuild AZoLifeSciences AZoAi Facebook Twitter LinkedIn News-Medical.Net provides this medical information service in accordance with these terms and conditions. Please note that medical information found on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide. Update Your Privacy Preferences Last Updated: Tuesday 12 Nov 2024 News-Medical.net - An AZoNetwork Site Owned and operated by AZoNetwork, © 2000-2024 Azthena logo with the word Azthena Maximise chat window Hide chat window Your AI Powered Scientific Assistant Hi, I'm Azthena, you can trust me to find commercial scientific answers from News-Medical.net. To start a conversation, please log into your AZoProfile account first, or create a new account. Registered members can chat with Azthena, request quotations, download pdf's, brochures and subscribe to our related newsletter content. Log in A few things you need to know before we start. Please read and accept to continue. Use of “Azthena” is subject to the terms and conditions of use as set out by OpenAI. Content provided on any AZoNetwork sites are subject to the site Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy. Large Language Models can make mistakes. Consider checking important information. I understand, and agree to receive occasional emails about Azthena such as usage tips and new feature announcements. Please check the box above to proceed. Start Chat Great. Ask your question. Clear Chat Clear Chat Brief Moderate Detailed Azthena may occasionally provide inaccurate responses. Read the full terms. Terms While we only use edited and approved content for Azthena answers, it may on occasions provide incorrect responses. Please confirm any data provided with the related suppliers or authors. We do not provide medical advice, if you search for medical information you must always consult a medical professional before acting on any information provided. Your questions, but not your email details will be shared with OpenAI and retained for 30 days in accordance with their privacy principles. Please do not ask questions that use sensitive or confidential information. Read the full Terms & Conditions. Provide Feedback Submit Cancel You might also like... × New CDC report highlights disparities in flu hospitalization and vaccinationExploring the 1918 pandemic’s impact on Philadelphia’s Black and immigrant neighborhoods | Penn Today Skip to main content Open Search Bar Close Search Penn Today Logo Open Navigation Menu Arts, Humanities, & Social Sciences Sports Campus & Community Education, Business, & Law Health Sciences Science & Technology Search Search Icon Topics Arts, Humanities, & Social Sciences Sports Campus & Community Education, Business, & Law Health Sciences Science & Technology News News Archive Penn in the News Newsletters Announcements University Communications Staff University Communications website Penn Home A-Z Directory Calendar Maps Offices and Services Webmail EventsSee all → 11/5 Election Day The general election takes place. Polls open at 7 a.m. in Pennsylvania and close at 8 p.m. Please see your state’s Secretary of State website for up-to-date information on voter registration and polling locations. 7:00 a.m. - 8:00 p.m. Various locations Through 11/26 Biometric Screenings 2024 The Division of Human Resources invites Penn faculty and staff to participate in free biometric screening for blood pressure, glucose, and lipids. Upon completion, participants can earn $75 in Pulse Cash rewards. 9:00 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. Various locations 11/6 Mind and Mood Recharge For the first Wednesday of the month, Penn Museum and Penn Medicine host a Mind and Mood Recharge gathering featuring a botanical bar, a wellness marketplace, and all-levels wellness activities. 5:00 p.m. - 8:00 p.m. Penn Museum, 3260 South St. 11/15 Paint the Dance Floor: Wonderland The Institute of Contemporary Art, in collaboration with the Weitzman School of Design and The Sachs Program for Arts Innovation, present the annual Paint the Dance Floor party, this year with an ethereal garden theme. Guests can explore the ICA's exhibitions, capture moments at a photobooth, and create wearable flower art. 7:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. Institute of Contemporary Art, 118 S. 36th St. Close Open Search Bar Close Search Penn Today Logo Exploring the 1918 pandemic’s impact on Philadelphia’s Black and immigrant neighborhoods Penn Today Logo Open Navigation Menu Search Search Icon Arts, Humanities, & Social Sciences Exploring the 1918 pandemic’s impact on Philadelphia’s Black and immigrant neighborhoods Rising third-year Matthew Breier has been conducting research with public health historian David Barnes through the Penn Undergraduate Research Mentoring Program. Rising third-year student Matthew Breier helped David Barnes, associate professor in the Department of History and Sociology of Science, this summer with research on the impact of the 1918 influenza pandemic on Philadelphia’s Black and immigrant neighborhoods. Matthew Breier, a rising third-year student in the College of Arts and Sciences, is spending his summer immersed in primary sources like death certificates and Philadelphia’s 1918 city directory to learn about the impact of the 1918 influenza pandemic on Black and immigrant neighborhoods. As he researches each person who died of influenza, he works to catalog information about their demographics and neighborhoods.“If you see two people with the same last name listed right next to each other and they died a day or two apart, or even on the same day, you can imagine that they were a mother and her child or a husband and wife,” says Breier, who is double majoring in health and societies and in anthropology with minors in classical studies and history. “It brings this research to life for me.”He has pored through the thick directory to help public health historian David Barnes, associate professor in the Department of History and Sociology of Science, with research on the impact of the pandemic on Philadelphia’s Black and immigrant neighborhoods.Breier has conducted this work through the Penn Undergraduate Research Mentoring Program (PURM), a 10-week opportunity from the Center for Undergraduate Research and Fellowships. The program provides rising second- and third-year students with a $5,000 award to work alongside Penn faculty.Barnes says the 1918 flu pandemic was one of the worst in history and an anomaly compared to other outbreaks in that there was no flight from big cities, no blame or scapegoating, no heroes or villains, no clear beginning or end, and no major medical discoveries.“If there’s one constant in the history of epidemic diseases or infectious disease in general, it’s that they’re never equal-opportunity killers. The poor, disenfranchised, and marginalized always suffer more and die in greater numbers,” Barnes says. “Now, was that true of the 1918 flu?” he asks. “The answer is we don’t know. It’s mind-boggling how little we know about this thing that happened during the age of scientific medicine, during the age of mass media.”He explains that there are two components of the summer research project: mapping where people who died from influenza lived, and learning more about the characteristics of neighborhoods with high and low mortality rates.New insights, new skillsBreier says his research has mainly involved going through death certificates and Ancestry Library to find names he checks in the city directory. He has also taken trips to the Historical Society of Pennsylvania and Van Pelt-Dietrich Library Center to explore the housing, family structure, and community organization of Black and immigrant neighborhoods in Philadelphia in 1918.“We are gathering these addresses in order to plot them on a map to understand the distribution and spread of influenza throughout the various neighborhoods and wards of the city,” he says. Breier has observed that deaths in African American communities seemed to be less commonly reported than deaths of European immigrants, particularly those of immigrants from England, Russia, Germany, Belgium, Italy, and Ireland. Pages from Philadelphia’s 1918 city directory. At the Historical Society, he found a detailed account from the Red Cross of the distribution of supplies to hospitals and the volunteers who made masks, pneumonia jackets, and food. Breier also read personal accounts of the nurses and volunteers who cared for the ill in their homes and Emergency Hospitals around Philadelphia at their own peril, as some volunteers also died of influenza.The research with Barnes has also taught Breier new skills. He has learned how to use Ancestry Library and how to do research in the Special Collections Library of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania. He has also learned how to read microfilm, since many of the Philadelphia city directories are only available in that medium. He says he sent his parents a picture of the machine to see if they knew what it was. They did.Also involved in this research are Nicholas Bonneau, adjunct assistant professor of public health at Franklin & Marshall College and a former fellow at Penn’s McNeil Center for Early American Studies, and Katya Korendiy, a rising third-year student supported in this work by Barnes’ research fund.Looking to the future, Barnes says he is trying to see what researchers find at each stage before deciding what to do next. One possibility is to undertake the same project for another city. Barnes envisions a website to document findings and a series of maps, a scholarly article, and maybe a book down the line.A present pandemic drives interest in the pastBarnes has spent his career specializing in the 19th century, he says, because “there’s just no end of 19th century problems and 19th century transformations that need our understanding and our attention.”As COVID hit, he was finishing his 2023 book, “Lazaretto,”—to which four previous PURM students contributed significant research—about quarantine in Philadelphia in the 19th century. He was getting interviewed about the history of quarantine and epidemics, and he talked about how the 1918 pandemic was the best analogy to COVID when talking about disease transmission. Barnes says COVID became an important part of his teaching.“There’s many different lessons we could learn from COVID, but to me the glaring lesson of COVID was differential vulnerability, that certain populations were much more likely to have severe cases and die from COVID than others,” he says, “and I felt like we weren’t learning that lesson.”Barnes began to pay more attention to recent work in social epidemiology, looking at research on how chronic stress weakens immune responses and makes people more vulnerable to health threats.A statistic he shares with his students is that in 2024, a Black woman with an advanced degree is more likely to die in childbirth than a white woman who did not finish high school. He says the disparity is not related to genetics or behavior, rather “the most plausible explanation is this idea of chronic stress, that the experience of dealing with racial discrimination every single day of their lives builds up in the body and creates this biochemical vulnerability.”Barnes says he became interested in whether people in the past experienced chronic stress, and he decided to study whether certain populations were more vulnerable to dying from the flu in 1918.While Barnes was landing on this area of research, Breier was a high school student living in Woodbridge, Connecticut. “COVID affected the majority of my high school years, and it really opened my eyes to how devastating a disease could be on an individual level and also to society,” he says.That affected his decision to become a health and societies major, and when he took Barnes’ course The People’s Health this spring, Breier did a project looking at the parallels between COVID and the 1918 flu.Breier says his favorite part of PURM is how it enabled him to receive one-on-one mentorship from Barnes for research in a department he cares about deeply and that it has introduced him to how research in the humanities works.“In order to understand the full picture of the period and event we are examining, we must interact with and examine both quantitative and qualitative data and documents,” Breier says. “I love being part of PURM and feel that it is an incredibly valuable experience. Matthew Breier, a rising third-year student in the College of Arts and Sciences, spent a lot of time going through Philadelphia’s 1918 city directory this summer. Through the Penn Undergraduate Research Mentoring Program, he is helping professor David Barnes understand the impact of the 1918 influenza pandemic on the city’s Black and immigrant neighborhoods. Credits Erica Moser Writer Eric Sucar Photographer Date July 18, 2024 Subtopics Research, Center for Undergraduate Research and Fellowships, Undergraduate Students, Faculty, History, Infectious Diseases, City of Philadelphia Schools School of Arts & Sciences Share Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Facebook Read Next How food moves around cities Campus & Community At Convocation, a call to ‘come together’ The ceremony marked the start of Penn’s 285th academic year, with about 2,500 new students gathered on Franklin Field. Campus & Community Move-In coordinators help ease transition to college Forty-eight second-year, third-year, and fourth-year students will be on the ground during Move-In to assist approximately 6,000 new and returning Quakers. Health Sciences The power of protons Penn Medicine has treated more than 10,000 cancer patients at three proton therapy centers across the region, including the largest and busiest center in the world—while also leading the way in research to expand the healing potential of these positive particles. Campus & Community To Penn’s Class of 2024: ‘The world needs you’ The University celebrated graduating students on Monday during the 268th Commencement. Penn Today Logo logo-new-2 If there’s news at Penn, you’ll find it here. We strive to bring you faculty, staff, and student profiles, research updates, and the latest happenings on campus. Office of University Communications Suite 200 3901 Walnut Street Philadelphia, PA 19104-3608 215.898.8721 upnews@pobox.upenn.edu Facebook Instagram Twitter LinkedIn Flickr YouTube © 2024 Penn Today, University of Pennsylvania Penn Homepage Disclaimer Emergency Services Privacy Policy Report Accessibility Issues and Get Help Report Copyright InfringementCDC ACIP Meeting: Updated Guidelines for RSV, COVID-19, HPV, and Other Vaccines Menu SECTIONS News Features CME Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia Diagnosis & Disease Info Topics Abdominal Infections Bone and Joint Infections Cardiovascular Infections Central Nervous System Infections Covid 19 News & Insights Eye Infections Gastrointestinal Infections General Infectious Disease General Medicine Hepatitis HIV/AIDS Infection Control and Prevention Nosocomial Infections Pleuropulmonary and Bronchial Infections Practice Management Reproductive Organ Infections and Sexually Transmitted Infections Sepsis Skin and Soft Tissue Infection Upper Respiratory Tract Infections Urinary Tract Infection Vector-Borne Illnesses Haymarket Medical Network Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMedical BagMPRNeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Search for: COVID-19 News CME Drugs Calculators Charts Resources Multimedia Meetings Jobs Part of the News and Features CME Conferences Clinical Tools Special Collections Multimedia General Infectious Disease CDC ACIP Meeting: Updated Guidelines for RSV, COVID-19, HPV, and Other Vaccines Sophie Gao;Angela Schettini | July 19, 2024 Credit: Getty Images The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices updated guidelines and recommendations for several infectious diseases. Between June 26 and 28, 2024, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) discussed updates, guidelines, and recommendations for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), COVID-19, influenza, pneumococcal, meningococcal, and other infectious diseases. Contents hide 1 Respiratory Syncytial Virus 2 Haemophilus influenzae type b 3 COVID-19 4 Influenza 5 Pneumococcal Disease 6 Meningococcal Disease 7 Maternal and Pediatric RSV Vaccines 8 Human Papillomavirus Respiratory Syncytial Virus On May 31, 2024, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Moderna’s mRESVIA® (mRNA-1345) vaccine for RSV. The single-dose prefilled syringe was approved for use in patients aged 60 years and older. This vaccine is an alternative to Abrysvo® (RSVPreF) and Arexvy® (adjuvanted RSVPreF3).1 At the June 2024 meeting, the ACIP voted to revise RSV vaccination guidelines. The RSV vaccine was previously recommended for all patients aged 75 and older, with eligibility extended to those aged 60 to 74 years in some cases. The new guidelines now recommend that high-risk patients in both age groups receive 1 lifetime dose of an RSV vaccine produced by any manufacturer. The CDC will publish clinical considerations that define which chronic medical conditions and other risk factors constitute high-risk populations. At this time, the ACIP recommends against the administration of a second dose for patients who have been vaccinated.2 This decision was influenced by data from the CDC’s Immunization Safety Office and the FDA’s report on Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD) Rapid Cycle Analyses (RCA) on the risk for Guillain Barré syndrome (GBS) following RSV vaccination. The organizations observed an elevated incident rate ratio for GBS in RSV vaccine recipients. In a positive-predictive value-adjusted analysis, only RSVPreF vaccination was significantly associated with GSB risk. Although the risk of developing GBS secondary to RSV vaccination is low, the ACIP decided that the nature of the disease is too severe to justify administering RSV vaccines to populations who are not at immediate high risk until more data are gathered.3 “All infants are recommended to be protected by either maternal RSV vaccination or nirsevimab for the 2024-25 RSV reason.11 Haemophilus influenzae type b The ACIP voted to recommend Vaxelis® (DTaP-IPV-Hib-HepB), in addition to PedvaxHIB® (PRP-OMP), as another primary option for H influenzae type b (Hib) among American Indian and Alaska Native infants. Vaxelis, which is a combination vaccine, includes formulations to protect against diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis (DTaP), inactivated poliovirus, H influenzae type b conjugate, and hepatitis B virus.4 This decision was based on data demonstrating that the proportion of American Indian or Alaska Native infants (N=298; Vaxelis, n=152; PedvaxHIB, n=146) with anti-Hib concentrations above the accepted value of short-term protection 30 days after dose 1 was similar between Vaxelis and PedvaxHIB recipients (75.7% and 71.2%, respectively). However, the proportion of infants with anti-Hib concentration above the accepted value of long-term protection 150 days after dose 1 was higher among Vaxelis recipients (83.6% vs 71.7%-71.8%; P <.05).4 COVID-19 During the 2023 to 2024 season, the VSD identified 2 statistical signals for mRNA COVID-19 vaccines. The first was in relation to GBS occurrence following BNT162b2 vaccination among patients aged 65 years and older. It was determined that if vaccination confers increased risk for GBS, the risk is similar to what is considered acceptable for other vaccines recommended for adult populations. The second was the incidence of ischemic stroke following mRNA-1273 vaccination in patients aged 65 years and older and BNT162b2 vaccination in patients aged 50 to 64 years. Although a statistical signal for ischemic stroke was observed with bivalent BNT162b2 in the 2022-2023 season, there is no clear or consistent evidence of safety issues for either mRNA vaccine with respect to ischemic stroke.5 The ACIP voted to recommend a single dose of the updated 2024-2025 COVID-19 vaccine for, as authorized or approved by the FDA.6 Influenza The ACIP maintains their recommendation for routine annual influenza vaccination among all individuals aged 6 months and older with no known contraindications.7 Members of the committee also recommend high-dose inactivated (HD-IIV3) and adjuvanted inactivated (aIIV3) influenza vaccines as acceptable options for solid organ transplant recipients aged 18 to 64 years on immunosuppressive therapy, indicating no preference over other age-appropriate IIV3s or RIV3.7 Pneumococcal Disease A work group tasked with evaluating pneumococcal 21-valent conjugate vaccine (PCV21) use in adults considered the following policy questions: Should PCV21 be recommended for US adults aged 19 years and older who currently have a recommendation to receive a PCV? (Group 1) Should PCV21 be recommended for US adults aged 50 to 64 years who currently do not have a risk-based pneumococcal vaccine indication? (Group 2) Should PCV21 be recommended for US adults aged 19 to 49 years who currently do not have a risk-based pneumococcal vaccine indication? (Group 3) The group members decided that there was not sufficient evidence to recommend lowering the age-based recommendation for PCV21 to 19 or 50 years.8 The ACIP voted to recommend PCV21 as an option among other vaccines available for adults aged 19 years and older for whom PCV receipt is indicated.8 Meningococcal Disease The ACIP evaluated immunogenicity and safety data for the pentavalent meningococcal vaccine (MenABCWY) that were captured from phase 3 trials. In a broad panel of 110 serogroup B strains, representing 95% of US serogroup B disease-causing strains, the pentavalent vaccine demonstrated a persistent immune response for up to 24 months. Safety and immunogenicity were also demonstrated in adolescents and young adults.9 If approved by the FDA, the MenABCWY vaccine will be administered intramuscularly in 2 doses (0.5 mL per dose) given at least 6 months apart as active immunization to prevent invasive disease caused by Neisseria meningitidis serogroups A, B, C, W, and Y in individuals aged 10 to 25 years.9 Further data showed a favorable safety profile as well as noninferiority to the MenACWY and MenB vaccines. Although substantial drops in titers for serogroup A and 3 B strains were observed 24 months after pentavalent vaccination, a subsequent booster dose elicited a robust immune response.9 An ACIP Work Group presented risk-based guidelines to the ACIP, identifying potential risk groups for the MenB vaccine based on the duration of congregate living and time taken to complete the vaccine series. Evidence suggests that 4-year college students vs non-undergraduate students are at increased risk (5.2-fold higher) for serogroup B disease. Living on campus is another risk factor, increasing students’ risk for serogroup B disease by a factor of 2.9.10 The proposed risk groups include adolescents planning to attend college, as well as adolescents living in congregate settings (eg, foster care, boarding schools, and correctional facilities) for a long enough period to complete the MenB vaccine series. Any adolescent may receive the MenB vaccine if they desire protection, even if their congregate living-related risk is uncertain.10 Maternal and Pediatric RSV Vaccines Members of the National Center for Immunizations and Respiratory Diseases discussed the challenges of maternal RSV vaccine uptake in the 2023-2024 season as well as plans for the upcoming 2024-2025 RSV season. In the 2023 season, an estimated 51.2% of infants were protected against RSV by either receipt of nirsevimab or maternal RSV vaccination. Clinicians faced limited supply of nirsevimab due to challenges with procurement and insurance coverage alongside timing of policy decisions. However, there are no anticipated supply challenges for the 2024-2025 season.11 Nirsevimab supply will be limited beginning in early September 2024 but broad availability is expected by October. According to the ACIP, “All infants are recommended to be protected by either maternal RSV vaccination or nirsevimab for the 2024-25 RSV reason.”.11 In regard to the administration of Pfizer’s RSV vaccine during pregnancy, safety data reported by the CDC indicated that vaccine-related symptoms and conditions matched expectations for receipt between 32- and 36-weeks’ gestation. Further evidence also indicated that vaccination during pregnancy was associated with low preterm birth incidence (4.1%), falling within the expected historical range (3.1%-6.1%).12 The CDC also shared data on nirsevimab outcomes among infants during their first RSV (2023-2024) season. The vaccine was highly effective against RSV-associated emergency department encounters and hospitalization; however, the duration of protection remains unknown.13 During the meeting, the ACIP considered the administration of additional RSV doses among women beyond their first pregnancy. Members of the committee decided to recommend against maternal vaccination for patients who received the vaccine during a prior pregnancy. However, they recommend nirsevimab for infants born to women who were vaccinated against RSV during prior pregnancy. The ACIP may update their guidance in the future if presented with new data.14 Human Papillomavirus With meetings beginning in July 2024, the ACIP will form a work group to review guidelines for human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination. Current guidance recommends that all patients receive 2 vaccines doses. Administration of the first dose is recommended between the ages of 11 and 12 but may occur as early as age 9. The second dose should be administered between 6 to 12 months of age. In patients aged 15 to 26 years, as well as immunocompromised individuals, the vaccine should be administered as a 3-dose series. Administration of the second dose should occur 1 to 2 months after the first dose, with the third dose at least 6 months thereafter. Shared clinical-decision making can be used to determine if the HPV vaccine should be administered to patients aged 27 to 45 years.15 The ACIP’s work group will consider the number of doses to recommend for the HPV vaccine series, age for routine vaccination, and guidance around shared clinical-decision making at the July 2024 meeting. General data related to the number of doses in the HPV vaccination schedule and routine age recommendations are expected to be presented to the ACIP in October 2024.15 References: Das R. Update on Moderna’s RSV vaccine, mRESVIA (mRNA-1345), in adults ≥60 years of age. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 26, 2024. Accessed June 26, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/04-RSV-Adult-Das-508.pdf Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) day 1. YouTube. Published June 26, 2024. Accessed June 26, 2024. https://www.youtube.com/live/WJ-0ogKt56w Lloyd P. Evaluation of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) following respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) vaccination among adults 65 years and older. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Published June 26, 2024. Accessed June 26, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/06-RSV-Adult-Lloyd-508.pdf Collins J. Evidence to recommendations and proposed recommendations: use of vaxelis among American Indian and Alaska Native infants. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 26, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/02-Vaxelis-Collins-508.pdf Duffy J. COVID-19 vaccine safety surveillance for the 2023-2024 season. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 27, 2024. Accessed June 27, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/04-COVID-Duffy-508.pdf Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) day 2. YouTube. Published June 27, 2024. Accessed June 27, 2024. https://www.youtube.com/live/DQslT3K9L8Y Grohskopf L, Ferdinands J, Blanton L. Influenza updates, Work Group considerations, and proposed recommendations for the 2024-25 influenza season. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 27, 2024. Accessed June 27, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/03-influenza-grohskopf-508.pdf Kobayashi M. Summary of Work Group interpretations of EtR and policy option on PCV21 use in adults. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 27, 2024. Accessed June 27, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/04-Pneumococcal-Kobayashi-508.pdf Sohn W. MenABCWY for the prevention of invasive meningococcal disease caused by serogroups A, B, C, W, and Y. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 26, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/03-Mening-GSK-508.pdf Schillie SF. Work Group considerations regarding MenABCWY vaccine and discussion of potential risk groups for MenB vaccination. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 28, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/04-Mening-Schillie-508.pdf Stokley S. Implementation and uptake of nirsevimab and maternal medicine. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/02-RSV-Mat-Peds-Stokley-508.pdf Moro PL. Maternal RSV vaccine safety surveillance. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 28, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/03-RSV-Mat-Peds-Moro-508.pdf Payne A. Summary of effectiveness of nirsevimab in infants. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 28, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/04-RSV-Mat-Peds-Payne-508.pdf Jones J. Maternal/pediatric RSV Work Group considerations. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 28, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/05-RSV-Mat-Peds-Jones-508.pdf Brooks O. Introduction to the HPV vaccines Work Group. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published June 28, 2024. Accessed June 28, 2024. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2024-06-26-28/01-HPV-brooks-508.pdf Share this article Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share by Email Print Picked For You While UK Influenza Levels Rebounded 2022/23, Vaccine Effectiveness Was Moderate FDA Approves Yimmugo for Primary Humoral Immunodeficiency Pregnant Patients With Pulmonary Hypertension Have Higher Rate of Adverse Events Latest News HIV Mortality Trends 1999-2020: Rates Drop, Then Stabilize Pivmecillinam Viable First-Line Treatment Option for Uncomplicated UTI CDC Recommends RSV Vaccine for Older Adults Aged 75 Years and Older Cookie Settings ABOUT ADVERTISE CONNECT Remarkable healthcare content Cancer Therapy AdvisorClinical AdvisorClinical Pain AdvisorDermatology AdvisorEndocrinology AdvisorGastroenterology AdvisorHematology AdvisorInfectious Disease AdvisorMcKnight’s Home CareMcKnight’s Long-term CareMcKnight’s Senior LivingMedical BagMPRmyCMENACENeurology AdvisorOncology Nurse AdvisorOphthalmology AdvisorOptometry AdvisorPsychiatry AdvisorPulmonology AdvisorRare Disease AdvisorRenal and Urology NewsRheumatology AdvisorSleep Wake AdvisorThe Cardiology AdvisorVaccine Advisor Copyright © 2024 Haymarket Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in any form without prior authorization. Your use of this website constitutes acceptance of Haymarket Media’s Privacy Policy and Terms & Conditions. Close more info about CDC ACIP Meeting: Updated Guidelines for RSV, COVID-19, HPV, and Other Vaccines Loading... Close more info about CDC ACIP Meeting: Updated Guidelines for RSV, COVID-19, HPV, and Other Vaccines Loading...State doctor shares what Coloradans should know about the bird flu Skip to contentNewsWeatherSportsContests11 CaresWatch Live11 ConnectsEspañolHomeElection ResultsPresidential Election MapColorado Interactive ResultsNewsEspañolCrimeInternationalNationalPoliticsStateWantedWeatherWeather CamsTraffic WatchWeather Maps7-Day ForecastsRadarWatch LiveSubmit a Story IdeaSubmit Photos and VideosContestsFind ItSportsClassroom ChampionsNCAANFLScoreboardNationalViewhouse Sports BlitzFriday Night EndzoneBroncosAir ForceAdvertise With UsStation JobsKKTV News App11 Connects11 CaresCommunity CalendarGood News FridayVideoMeet the TeamContact UsMr. FoodMyKKTVMeTVSign up for .COM DailyTV ListingsZeam - News StreamsCircle CountryGray DC BureauInvestigateTVWatching Your WalletPowerNation11 For HealthDigital MarketingState doctor shares what Coloradans should know about the bird fluColorado doctors shares what you should know about bird fluBy Aaron VitatoePublished: Jul. 15, 2024 at 5:13 PM MDTEmail This LinkShare on FacebookShare on X (formerly Twitter)Share on PinterestShare on LinkedInCOLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. (KKTV) - After five people were found to have bird flu, Colorado health experts are speaking on what the general public needs to know about the illness.Last week, Governor Jared Polis verbally declared a disaster emergency in order to support Colorado agriculture after an outbreak of avian influenza in Weld County. These cases impacted poultry and dairy cattle, with nearly 30 cases of animals being quarantined being reported within the past month. There was also at least one confirmed human case toward the start of the month.Over the weekend, four people tested positive for the bird flu, with another being a presumptive positive pending CDC results. These are the first human cases of bird flu in the state since 2022, according to state health officials.Dr. Rachel Herlihy, the state epidemiologist with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, shared guidance with anyone working directly with poultry and cattle. She said the symptoms in the few human cases we have seen have been mild, with one of the main symptoms being pink eye. “Otherwise, what we’re looking for other more common influenza like symptoms, so it’s going to be things like fever, chills, coughs or throat, headache, those types of things, and certainly important for individuals that have regular contact with birds that are ill, to to let public health know if they develop any of those types of symptoms,” Dr. Herlihy said. If you have these symptoms after coming in contact with cattle or poultry, you can call CDPHE at (303) 692-2700 (after normal business hours: 303-370-9395).But Dr. Herlihy said it’s important to note that the risk to the general public is very low.This is really limited to people that are working in the poultry industry right now, or the dairy industry, not the general public,” she said. Furthermore, so far, she said cases have only been found in the northeast part of the state.She added that groceries coming from these areas are still safe to consume as long as they are properly prepared.“Appropriately cooked poultry, appropriately cooked eggs, and and also beef products are continuing to be safe, and the same is certainly true for our milk supply,” Dr. Herlihy said. “There have been multiple tests that have been done looking at the safety of pasteurization, and there’s great news there that our commercial milk supply is safe.”As far as limiting the spread of the virus, the Colorado Department of Agriculture said they are closely monitoring cattle and isolating sick animals. This comes more than a year after avian influenza has caused shortages of eggs. But, so far, health experts have not indicated whether this is a concern yet.Colorado doctor shares update on bird fluFor more information, CDPHE shared the following resources:- CDPHE Avian Flu in Humans Webpage- Department of Agriculture: HPAI in Dairy Cattle- CDC: Avian Influenza General Information- CDC: Current Situation on Bird FluCopyright 2024 KKTV. All rights reserved.Most Read Commercial Motor Vehicles banned from southbound I-25 between Colorado Springs and DenverMattel apologizes after ‘Wicked’ misprint found on dolls’ packaging directs customers to adult film site Death investigation underway after couple and 2 dogs are found shot inside Colorado home Colorado Springs man banned from Yellowstone National Park Colorado woman gives away her camper to survivor of Hurricane Helene whose home was destroyed 10-year-old girl makes over $2,000 selling chickens, but the bank kept the money, family saysUnofficial results of opposing marijuana ballot questions in Colorado Springs shift over the weekend Squatters inside abandoned Colorado Springs motel may have caused structure fireLatest News “I feel like if you do the crime, you need to do the time no matter the age” Local business owner says juveniles need to be held accountable for crimes Colorado Springs man banned from Yellowstone National Park Pedestrian struck in crash in northeast Colorado Springs Two minors left with critical injuries after hit by a car in Colorado SpringsRise in juvenile related crimes 101-year-old Pueblo veteran honored on Veteran's Day CDOT: What to do to lessen the risk of animal-caused crashes in Colorado Man sustains serious injuries after alleged stabbing in East Colorado SpringsNewsWeatherSports11 CaresElection ResultsContact UsSign Up for .COM Daily11 ConnectsGood News FridayAdvertise with UsKKTV7250 Campus Dr.Colorado Springs, CO 80920(719) 578-0000Public Inspection FileFCC Applicationspublicfile@kktv.com - (719) 634-2844Terms of ServicePrivacy PolicyYOUR PRIVACY CHOICESEEO StatementAdvertisingDigital MarketingClosed Captioning/Audio DescriptionCookie SettingsAt Gray, our journalists report, write, edit and produce the news content that informs the communities we serve. Click here to learn more about our approach to artificial intelligence.A Gray Local Media Station © 2002-2024Tiba Biotech, BARDA Partner To Develop Therapeutics Against Influenza | Contract Pharma Login Join FOLLOW: Subscribe Free Magazine eNewsletter Checkout Menu Magazine News Manufacturing Packaging Development Compliance Top 20 Directory Solution Center Events More Magazine News Manufacturing Packaging Development Compliance Top 20 Directory Solution Center Events Current / Back Issue Features Editorial Columns Digital Edition eNewsletter Archive Our Team Editorial Guidelines Subscribe Now Advertise Now Top Features Sustainability in Pharma: CDMOs Move Fast to Cut Carbon Footprint 25th Anniversary Retrospective Top 50 Biopharma Products Drive Growth in Contract Manufacturing Single-Use Systems for Biomanufacturing CEO Spotlight: Thierry Van Nieuwenhove Breaking News Online Exclusives Industry News Collaborations & Alliances Promotions & Moves Trials & Filings Financial Reports Bio News & Views Custom Sourcing News Packaging & Tracking CRO News Live From Shows Top News GenScript Establishes Operations Site & Logistics Center in Sydney, Australia Altimmune Appoints Chief Financial Officer Koneksa Names Chief Business Officer J&J's 3Q Revenue up 5% Global API Market Expected to See Steady Growth Through 2029 APIs Aseptic Processing Cleaning Validation Clinical Trial Materials Cytotoxics and High Potency Manufacturing Equipment Excipients Extractables and Leachables Facilities Fill/Finish Lyophilization Parenterals Process Development Process Validation Risk Management Scale-up/ Technology Transfer Solid Dosage/ Creams/ Ointments GenScript Establishes Operations Site & Logistics Center in Sydney, Australia Global API Market Expected to See Steady Growth Through 2029 Effects of Residual Carbon Content Matrix on Determining Pharma Regulated Elemental Impurities Accurate Determination of Resin Substitution in Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis Impurity Level Confirmation by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy Summary Capsules Cold Chain Management Injectables Logistics Serialization Solid Dosage / Semi-solids Supply Chain Vials Peli BioThermal Unveils Crēdo Vault for Bulk Pharma Shipments SIRIO Opens €16M Packaging Facility on German Site Aptar CSP’s N-Sorb Accepted to FDA’s Emerging Tech Program Nipro Launches D2F Glass Vials Using Stevanato's EZ-fill Technology Securing Sustainability Throughout the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Analytical Services Bioanalytical Services Bioassay Developement Biologics, Proteins, Vaccines Biosimilars Chemistry Clinical Trials Drug Delivery Drug Development Drug Discovery Formulation Development Information Technology Laboratory Testing Methods Development Microbiology Preclinical Outsourcing R&D Toxicology Citius' LYMPHIR Shows Potential to Boost Pembrolizumab Efficacy Longeveron Taps Devin Blass as CTO and SVP of CMC Maravai LifeSciences to Acquire DNA & RNA Business of Officinae Bio Huons Acquires Stake in PanGen to Bolster Biopharma Business Asymchem Leverages AI to Optimize Protein Design with STAR Platform Filtration & Purification GMPs/GCPs Inspections QA/QC Regulatory Affairs Validation From Ambiguity to Action: The FDA’s New Nitrosamine Guidance Abzena to Expand Microbiology Lab Space to Support Biologic Manufacturing Lonza Completes Drug Product Services Facility Expansion in Basel Rottendorf Pharma Selects ValGenesis VLMS Sustainability in Pharma: CDMOs Move Fast to Cut Carbon Footprint Companies Categories Corporate Capabilities Add New Company Contract Service Directory Companies BioTechnique LOTTE BIOLOGICS TaiMed Biologics INCOG BioPharma Services UBI Pharma Inc. Companies News Releases Posters Brochures Services Videos Case Study White Papers Jobs Contract Service Directory Companies BioTechnique LOTTE BIOLOGICS TaiMed Biologics INCOG BioPharma Services UBI Pharma Inc. Webinars Live From Shows Magazine Current / Back Issue Features Editorial Columns Editorial Guidelines Subscribe Now Advertise Now Enewsletter Archive Digital Edition Directory Companies Categories Corporate Capabilities Add Your Company Manufacturing APIs Aseptic Processing Cleaning Validation Clinical Trial Materials Cytotoxics and High Potency Manufacturing Equipment Excipients Extractables and Leachables Facilities Fill/Finish Lyophilization Parenterals Process Development Process Validation Risk Management Scale-up/ Technology Transfer Solid Dosage/ Creams/ Ointments cGMP Manufacture Packaging Capsules Cold Chain Management Injectables Logistics Serialization Solid Dosage / Semi-solids Supply Chain Vials Development Analytical Services Bioanalytical Services Bioassay Developement Biologics, Proteins, Vaccines Biosimilars Chemistry Clinical Trials Drug Delivery Drug Development Drug Discovery Formulation Development Information Technology Laboratory Testing Methods Development Microbiology Preclinical Outsourcing R&D Toxicology Compliance Filtration & Purification GMPs/GCPs Inspections QA/QC Regulatory Affairs Validation Top 20 Pharma & BioPharma Contract Pharma Direct Breaking News Online Exclusives Slideshows Experts Opinions Surveys Outsourcing Survey Salary Survey Glossary Videos White Papers Podcasts Infographics Microsites Companies News Releases Posters Brochures Services Videos Case Study White Papers Contract Pharma Conference Contract Pharma Conference Speakers Exhibitors Conference Sessions eBook Webinars Events Industry Events Live from Show Events Webinars Classifieds / Job Bank Classifieds Job Bank About Us About Us Contact Us Advertise With Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Breaking News Tiba Biotech, BARDA Partner to Develop Therapeutics Against Influenza Tiba Biotech's initial focus will be on developing a prototype RNAi-based therapeutic for H1N1 influenza. 07.15.24 Tiba Biotech LLC, a Cambridge-based preclinical biopharmaceutical company, has partnered with the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), part of the Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR) at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through initiation of an EZ-BAA contract to develop groundbreaking therapeutics against influenza. The $749,999 contract, awarded through a highly competitive review process, supports early-stage therapeutic platform development for the Flexible and Strategic Therapeutics (FASTx) program of BARDA. This initiative aims to advance cutting-edge therapeutic platform technologies, such as RNA-mediated interference (RNAi), which could be rapidly deployed in response to emerging viral threats. Tiba Biotech's initial focus will be on developing a prototype RNAi-based therapeutic for H1N1 influenza that targets the highly conserved viral nucleoprotein and will be delivered via Tiba's RNABL platform. “We are excited to receive this BARDA award, which will advance Tiba's innovative approach to combating influenza and other viral threats,” said Dr. Jasdave Chahal, co-founder and lead investigator of the project. “We believe our technology has the potential to transform the landscape of RNA therapeutics.” This initiative is an extension of Tiba's ongoing work combating influenza pandemic threats, most notably in the form of a novel multi-antigen mRNA-based H7N9 flu vaccine funded under a Phase II SBIR award from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and ongoing collaborations with the Collaborative Influenza Vaccine Innovation Centers (CIVICs). This project is being supported in whole with federal funds from the Department of Health and Human Services; Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response; Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), under contract number 75A50124C00014. Related Searches Drug Development Breaking News GenScript Establishes Operations Site & Logistics Center in Sydney, Australia Altimmune Appoints Chief Financial Officer Koneksa Names Chief Business Officer J&J's 3Q Revenue up 5% Global API Market Expected to See Steady Growth Through 2029 View Breaking News > CURRENT ISSUE October/November 2024 Sustainability in Pharma: CDMOs Move Fast to Cut Carbon Footprint 25th Anniversary Retrospective Top 50 Biopharma Products Drive Growth in Contract Manufacturing Single-Use Systems for Biomanufacturing CEO Spotlight: Thierry Van Nieuwenhove C-Suite Spotlight: Navin Molecular Securing Sustainability Throughout the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Greening the Supply Chain: A CDMO Perspective Pioneering Production Cell for the Pharmaceutical and Biotech Industry Strategies for More Effective Human Factors Engineering for Injectables View More > Cookies help us to provide you with an excellent service. By using our website, you declare yourself in agreement with our use of cookies. You can obtain detailed information about the use of cookies on our website by clicking on "More information”. Got It About Us Privacy Policy Terms And Conditions Contact Us follow us Subscribe Latest Breaking News From Nutraceuticals World Givaudan Becomes Authorized Distributor of Comet’s Arrabina Upcycled Fiber Kerry Health and Nutrition Institute Release 2025 Trends on Food, Beverage, Supplement Innovation PanTheryx Launches GLP-1 Support Product Latest Breaking News From Coatings World Clariant Launches Melamine-free Flame Retardant for Intumescent Coatings Protech Group Acquires Caldwell Chemical Coatings Asian Paints Reports 2Q 2024-25 Fiscal Results Latest Breaking News From Medical Product Outsourcing StimLabs's Umbilical Cord-Derived Wound Care Product Released in U.S. New Medical-Grade Bio-Based PVC Compounds Introduced Croívalve Reports 1st Tricuspid Coaptation Valve Implant in U.S. Feasibility Study Latest Breaking News From Contract Pharma GenScript Establishes Operations Site & Logistics Center in Sydney, Australia Altimmune Appoints Chief Financial Officer Koneksa Names Chief Business Officer Latest Breaking News From Beauty Packaging L'Oréal Groupe Promotes Innovation in China—and Celebrates Beauty Tech Winners Succession Drama is Uncovered at Estée Lauder Companies Weekly Recap: Neutrogena’s Partners, NAD Claims, Coty’s Sustainability Report & More Latest Breaking News From Happi Cosmetify Names Nikkie de Jager the World’s Most Powerful Beauty Influencer Big Lips in the Small Wonder L’Oréal’s Bioprinted Skin & Dove’s Deodorant Launch Latest Breaking News From Ink World Lars Schuetzenmeister Appointed MCC APAC Leader Weekly Recap: MNYPIA Slideshow, INX Adds C&A Top This Week’s Stories DuPont Reports Third Quarter 2024 Results Latest Breaking News From Label & Narrow Web MCC appoints new APAC leader HP wins big at Canadian Printing Awards Gala MAPP introduces private-brand portfolio of parts and consumables Latest Breaking News From Nonwovens Industry Unicharm Earns Science Based Target Initiative Approval Weekly Recap: Berry Completes Spin-Off and Merger with Glatfelter, Lenzing Expands Nonwovens Range Ahlstrom Reports Growing Net Sales Latest Breaking News From Orthopedic Design & Technology David Thordarson Takes Charge of American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society UPM Biomedicals Launches FibGel Injectable Nanocellulose Hydrogel for Medical Devices ONWARD Medical Attracts €50 Million in Capital Latest Breaking News From Printed Electronics Now TechBlick's Online Innovations Festival Set for Dec. 11, 2024 Canatu Ranked by Deloitte Technology Fast 50 JAS Jet Air Service SPA Achieves Zero Error Count with Zebra’s RFID Solutions Copyright © 2024 Rodman Media. All rights reserved. Use of this constitutes acceptance of our privacy policy The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Rodman Media. AD BLOCKER DETECTED Our website is made possible by displaying online advertisements to our visitors.Please consider supporting us by disabling your ad blocker. FREE SUBSCRIPTION Already a subscriber? LoginPoultry workers at Risk: U.S. calls for Avian Influenza vaccination Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Spain Indonesia Search Register Login Search TECHNICAL ARTICLES MONOGRAPHICS Species REPORTAGE INTERVIEWS SECTORIAL NEWS Authors BUSINESS DIRECTORY PRODUCT GUIDES REGISTRATION/LOGIN AVINEWS MAGAZINE PRINTED SUBSCRIPTION AGRIFM - PODCAST AGRI - CALENDAR AGRINEWS CAMPUS REGIONS Spain Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Indonesia Magazine Feeding and nutrition of layers Themes Species Interviews Sectorial Authors Companies Product Events RECOMMENDED Alternative production Animal Nutrition AviNews aviNews Biosecurity Equipment Events Genetics 2024 PSA Annual Meeting 41st Saudi Agriculture 2024 Additives aditives alpacas Alphitobius diaperinus Amino acids aMPV Animal welfare Antibiotic-free poultry Artificial Intelligence Ascaridia galli READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER OTHER EDITIONS 19 Jul 2024 Poultry workers at Risk: U.S. calls for Avian Influenza vaccination As outbreaks of Avian Influenza continue to emerge, the call for vaccinating poultry workers grows louder. It is imperative that policymakers, industry leaders, and public health officials heed this call and take swift action. PDF FILE In the vast and intricate web of food production, poultry workers occupy a crucial yet perilous position. Their daily tasks ensure that millions of people can access affordable poultry products. However, these essential workers are increasingly at risk due to the emergence and spread of avian influenza (AI). With recent outbreaks across various states, there is a growing call for the vaccination of poultry workers against this deadly virus to safeguard their health and the stability of the poultry industry. The vulnerability of poultry workers Poultry workers are at the frontline of this battle against avian influenza. Their daily exposure to poultry increases their risk of contracting the virus, especially in the absence of adequate protective measures. Despite stringent biosecurity protocols, the highly contagious nature of AI means that even minor lapses can lead to outbreaks. The health risks faced by poultry workers extend beyond physical illness. The fear of contracting avian influenza adds to the stress and anxiety associated with their jobs. Moreover, many of these workers belong to marginalized communities with limited access to healthcare and other resources, compounding their vulnerability. The case for vaccination Given the high risk of avian influenza among poultry workers, vaccination has emerged as a vital preventive measure. Vaccination can significantly reduce the likelihood of infection and the severity of symptoms if an individual does contract the virus. This not only protects the health of the workers but also helps in preventing the spread of the virus within the community and beyond. Public health experts and industry stakeholders are advocating for the prioritization of poultry workers in vaccination programs. Such a move is not without precedent; healthcare workers and other high-risk groups are routinely given priority during flu vaccination campaigns. Extending this priority to poultry workers during AI outbreaks is a logical and necessary step.Continue after advertising. Implementing a vaccination program The successful implementation of a vaccination program for poultry workers requires coordinated efforts from multiple stakeholders, including government agencies, health organizations, and the poultry industry. Key steps in this process include: Identifying high-risk areas: Mapping out regions with significant poultry farming activities and recent AI outbreaks to prioritize vaccination efforts. Ensuring vaccine availability: Securing sufficient doses of the AI vaccine and ensuring they are distributed to high-risk areas promptly. Awareness and education: Conducting awareness campaigns to inform poultry workers about the benefits of vaccination and address any concerns or misconceptions. Access and logistics: Setting up vaccination centers in proximity to poultry farms and processing plants to ensure easy access for workers. Mobile vaccination units can also be deployed to reach remote areas. Monitoring and evaluation: Establishing systems to monitor the uptake of the vaccine and its effectiveness in preventing AI among poultry workers. This data can help refine and improve the vaccination program over time. Challenges and considerations While the benefits of vaccinating poultry workers against avian influenza are clear, several challenges must be addressed to ensure the success of such a program. These include: Vaccine hesitancy: Some workers may be reluctant to get vaccinated due to misinformation or distrust of medical interventions. Tailored communication strategies are needed to build trust and encourage vaccine uptake. Resource constraints: Ensuring adequate funding and resources for the vaccination program is critical. This includes securing vaccines, training healthcare providers, and setting up vaccination infrastructure. Regulatory approvals: Obtaining timely regulatory approvals for the AI vaccine can be a bottleneck. Streamlined processes are necessary to expedite this step without compromising safety and efficacy. Coordination among stakeholders: Effective collaboration between government agencies, health organizations, and the poultry industry is essential to overcome logistical and operational challenges. Conclusion Poultry workers play an indispensable role in the food supply chain, and their health and safety must be a priority. The threat of avian influenza is real and imminent, necessitating proactive measures to protect these workers. Vaccination against AI is a practical and effective strategy that can significantly reduce the risk of infection and ensure the continuity of poultry production. As outbreaks continue to emerge, the call for vaccinating poultry workers grows louder. It is imperative that policymakers, industry leaders, and public health officials heed this call and take swift action. By doing so, we not only safeguard the health of poultry workers but also protect the broader community from the devastating impacts of avian influenza. Sources: Available upon request PDF FILE Related to Health 11 Nov Turkey reports first H5N1 Avian Influenza outbreak in over a year 04 Nov Backyard pig infected with H5N1 virus in the U.S. 30 Oct France is scared by Salmonella and recalls 3 million eggs 28 Oct Mycotoxins, silent enemies of intestinal integrity 25 Oct Vaccination against avian influenza in France started a year ago MAGAZINE AVINEWS INTERNATIONAL Subscribe now to the poultry technical magazine OTHER EDITIONS READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER AUTHORS Zoetis Technical Team FOLLOW H&N Technical Team FOLLOW Brian Fairchild FOLLOW Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon FOLLOW Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan FOLLOW Guillermo Tellez FOLLOW Ken Bafundo FOLLOW Güner GÖVENÇ FOLLOW Nestor Ledesma Martínez FOLLOW Dra. Elein Hernández FOLLOW Talha Siddique FOLLOW EDITION AviNews International September 2024 In ovo vaccination with Embrex® technology helps support earlier, more robust immune response in chicks Zoetis Technical Team Egg Size H&N Technical Team Brian Fairchild Interview Brian Fairchild High Oleic Soybeans and their Impact on Egg and Poultry Meat Quality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Metapneumovirus Epidemiology and Seasonality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Controlling Insects in Poultry Production Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan Effects of Chronic Stress and Intestinal Inflammation on Commercial Poultry Health and Performance: Part I Guillermo Tellez Applications of Saponins in Poultry Production Ken Bafundo The Quality Parameters of Soybean and Alternative Protein Feedstuffs in Poultry Nutrition Güner GÖVENÇ Pathology of the Immune System in the Diagnosis of Immunosuppression in Poultry Nestor Ledesma Martínez Animal Welfare and Artificial Intelligence: A Combination of the Poultry Present or Future? Dra. Elein Hernández Advancing Poultry Health: The Role of Predictive Analytics in Disease Prevention Talha Siddique Biosecurity Compliance: The Balance Between Culture, Personality, Experience, Education and Technology Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon SUMMARY Subscribe now to aviNews magazine SEE MORE OTHER EDITIONS JOIN OUR POULTRY COMMUNITY Access the PDF articles Keep up to date with our newsletters Receive the magazine for free in digital version REGISTER DISCOVER LEGAL Privacy policy Cookies policy Más información sobre las cookies OUR MEDIA aviNews Magazine Other Media JOIN Online Register Printed subscriptions Advertise Publish with us Contact FOLLOW US 2024 Copyright Grupo de Comunicación agriNews, SL. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the content of this page in any format or communication, electronic or printed, without express authorization is prohibited.Request authorization. Agencia de Marketing GanaderoCOVID-19, influenza outbreaks have peaked: CDC - Focus Taiwan Focus Taiwan AppDownloadLatestEditor's PicksPhotos of the DayVideosNewsPoliticsCross-straitBusinessSocietyScience & TechCultureSportsEditionFocus Taiwan中央通訊社フォーカス台湾Fokus TaiwanGet Focus Taiwan appsFollow Focus TaiwanEditionFocus Taiwan中央通訊社フォーカス台湾Fokus TaiwanSearchLatestTaiwan shares close down 2.33%Taiwan rejects South China Sea claims of the Philippines, ChinaPLA conducts live-fire drills off China's southeastern coast: MNDTaiwan's four major carriers report highest-ever October salesFirst Danish parliamentarian group visits Taiwan since COVID-19PoliticsTaiwan rejects South China Sea claims of the Philippines, ChinaFirst Danish parliamentarian group visits Taiwan since COVID-19Continued disagreement over funding allocation bill leads to impasseCzech parliamentarians arrive in Taiwan, to meet president, FMMOFA video calls for Taiwan's participation in UNFCCCCross-StraitPLA conducts live-fire drills off China's southeastern coast: MNDControl Yuan faults Coast Guard over fatal Kinmen speedboat incidentTaiwan does not oppose Lithuania restoring ties with China: FM2 'hometown association' heads indicted over China-funded tripFrank Wu takes office as SEF chairmanBusinessTaiwan shares close down 2.33%Taiwan's four major carriers report highest-ever October salesU.S. dollar up in Taipei tradingTaiwan shares open sharply lowerNuclear power should remain a carbon-cutting option: Academia Sinica headSocietyTropical Storm Usagi forms, impact on Taiwan still uncertain: CWATaiwan headline newsTaiwan closes Lebanon pager explosion case, no local involvement foundDead body discovered in abandoned Taichung amusement parkCWA monitoring potential tropical storm southwest of GuamSportsTaipei 101 exhibition to feature 'most valuable baseball of all-time'Lin Yun-ju ousted from semifinals at WTT Champions FrankfurtShooter Liu Heng-yu grabs gold at world university championshipIn tight finish, Chan, Kudermetova ousted from WTA Finals semisTaiwan's Cho wins gold at Asian Open Water Swimming ChampionshipsScience & TechBlack-faced spoonbill 'rides' typhoon to Taiwan for winter migrationNCKU unveils AI-powered drowning detection systemTaiwan-Japan co-developed satellite 'Onglaisat' launched into spaceMore mobile communication systems a must for resiliency in war: ExpertExperts call on Taiwan to keep its semiconductor edge post U.S. electionsCultureTaiwanese-American director wins top award at San Diego Asian Film FestNTU Humanities Building wins top prize of Taiwan Architecture AwardsNetflix in Taiwan raising fees by 7-18%National Taiwan University ranks 26th in Asia in latest QS rankingsTaiwanese filmmaker wins accolade at Tokyo film festivalVideoIndonesia's new envoy to Taiwan supports strengthening bilateral tiesOver 180,000 attend Taiwan Pride in TaipeiChef André Chiang on importance of defining Taiwanese flavorsChef André Chiang on stereotypes shattered by his Michelin-starred restaurantsChef André Chiang on closing restaurant, shifting focus to culinary educationSponsored ContentRepresentative of Singapore Trade Office in Taipei, Mr.Yip Wei Kiat, gave a radiant smile when he participated in the Taichung Shopping FestivalHead of the Belgian Office in Taipei joined the Taichung Shopping Festival to promote Belgian cuisine.Professor Anne Wu Partners with NCCU to Launch ESG Solutions, Aiming to Help Global Businesses Achieve Sustainable TransformationTaiwan to host 37th ACSIC Conference in 20252024 TRENDY TAIPEI – JAM JAM ASIA cross-national festival to ignite music exchanges in AsiaSocietyCORONAVIRUS/COVID-19, influenza outbreaks have peaked: CDC07/16/2024 08:45 PMListenLinkWhatsappRedditLineEmailTo activate the text-to-speech service, please first agree to the privacy policy below. CNA photo July 16, 2024 Taipei, July 16 (CNA) COVID-19 and influenza cases in Taiwan have peaked, with the epidemic phases likely to pass by mid-August, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) said Tuesday.Emergency and outpatient department visits for both diseases saw a week-over-week decrease of more than 10 percent, CDC Deputy Director-General Lo Yi-chun (羅一鈞) told a news conference.The CDC forecasts that the epidemic phases for influenza and COVID-19 will end in early and mid-August, respectively, Lo said.However, a renewed outbreak of COVID-19 in the autumn cannot be ruled out, Lo added.According to CDC data, the most common COVID-19 variant detected both domestically and from abroad in the past four weeks is JN.1, accounting for 39 percent and 36 percent, respectively, with LB.1 coming second at 20 percent domestically and 9 percent abroad.Lee Chia-lin (李佳琳), the deputy director of the CDC's Epidemic Intelligence Center, said that 898 new domestic COVID-19 cases with severe complications were recorded last week, a week-over-week drop of around 9 percent."But the overall number of cases remains high, exceeding our epidemic prediction threshold, which indicates that the outbreak is still ongoing," Lee said, adding that 104 new COVID-19-related death cases were reported last week, slightly higher than the previous week's 99 cases.CDC Deputy Director-General Lo Yi-chun at a regular briefing in Taipei Tuesday. CNA photo July 16, 2024Regarding influenza, 11 deaths and 61 cases with severe complications were reported last week, Lee said.Meanwhile, Taiwan recorded four new cases of pertussis, also known as whooping cough, last week, bringing the total to 12 cases reported this year, the highest number for the same period since 2020, CDC data showed.Of the 12 cases, Tainan reported four, while Taipei, Taoyuan, and Kaohsiung each reported two, and Yilan County and Taichung one, Lee noted.Lee said that the cases ranged in age from less than one month to over 40 years old, with five cases involving infants aged three months or younger.The number of pertussis cases has increased globally this year, with new cases continuously reported in Europe and Asia, including China, which reported a total of 248,000 cases this year, seven times higher than the number of cases reported during the same period in the past, according to the CDC.Lo urged parents to get children fully vaccinated, particularly if they plan to travel abroad. (By Tseng Yi-ning and Sunny Lai) Enditem/ASG More in CORONAVIRUSCOVID-19 epidemic phase to pass mid-August: CDCAlthough Taiwan is still in a COVID-19 epidemic phase, it is expected to pass by mid-August, said the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) at a press conference in Taipei on Tuesday.07/30/2024 08:01 PMCDC to buy 5.5 million Moderna JN.1 COVID-19 vaccine shots for October rolloutThe Centers for Disease Control (CDC) on Wednesday announced a plan to purchase 5.5 million doses of the Moderna monovalent JN.1 COVID-19 vaccine, which will be administered, along with the flu vaccine, from Oct. 1.07/10/2024 09:40 PMCOVID-19 outbreak expected to peak in mid-July in Taiwan: CDCThe COVID-19 outbreak in Taiwan is projected to peak in mid-July, with weekly clinic or emergency room visits expected to soar to 130,000, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) said Tuesday.07/09/2024 10:42 PMView All0:00/0:00LatestBusinessTaiwan shares close down 2.33%11/12/2024 02:01 PMPoliticsTaiwan rejects South China Sea claims of the Philippines, China11/12/2024 01:05 PMCross-StraitPLA conducts live-fire drills off China's southeastern coast: MND11/12/2024 12:38 PMBusinessTaiwan's four major carriers report highest-ever October sales11/12/2024 12:15 PMPoliticsFirst Danish parliamentarian group visits Taiwan since COVID-1911/12/2024 12:06 PMMoreFocus TaiwanAbout usContact UsPrivacySubscriptionEditionFocus Taiwan中央通訊社フォーカス台湾Fokus TaiwanFollow UsFacebookX (Twitter)InstagramNewsletterRSS SubscriptionApp DownloadiOS AppAndroid AppLearn MoreWe value your privacy.Focus Taiwan (CNA) uses tracking technologies to provide better reading experiences, but it also respects readers' privacy. Click here to find out more about Focus Taiwan's privacy policy. When you close this window, it means you agree with this policy.Got it.Learn more172.30.142.73Oklahoma dairy farm recovers from Bird Flu: What officials are sayingSkip to main content HomeElection 2024 Oklahoma dairy herd hit by Bird Flu: What you need to knowAndy Dossett Bartlesville Examiner-EnterpriseShow Caption Hide Caption Health officials detail bird flu transmission to humans. What we know.Health officials are urging caution with where consumers get their milk as they investigate bird flu deaths in humans. Here's what we know.The Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food, and Forestry (ODAFF) announced a confirmed case of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in an Oklahoma dairy herd.The USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service confirmed the case after samples collected in April were submitted for testing.The affected dairy herd has fully recovered, and the farm reported no additional cases of HPAI. ODAFF Officials emphasize that there is no concern about the safety of pasteurized milk or dairy products."The commercial milk supply remains safe due to federal animal health requirements and pasteurization," read the OKDA press release."We have been monitoring detections of HPAI in other states since the first detection in March," said Oklahoma State Veterinarian Dr. Rod Hall. "Our team has been in constant communication with Oklahoma dairies asking them to heighten their biosecurity practices. PPE has also been made available to Oklahoma dairy farmers."Oklahoma is the 13th state to report a confirmed case of HPAI in a dairy herd. In the last 30 days, 52 confirmed cases have been reported across the United States.If any dairy farmers suspect cases of HPAI, they are urged to contact the ODAFF at 405-522-6141. Visit the ODAFF Disease Alerts page for more information on HPAI in dairy cattle, including recommended biosecurity measures.What are H5N1 LPAI and H5N1 HPAI, and how are they differentH5N1 LPAI (Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza) and H5N1 HPAI (Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza) are two forms of the H5N1 avian influenza virus, differentiated primarily by severity and impact.Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza (LPAI):Naturally occurs in wild birds and causes mild disease in poultry, often resulting in minor symptoms such as reduced egg production or mild respiratory issues.Typically, LPAI viruses do not cause significant illness or death in birds and are less likely to spread rapidly.While generally mild, LPAI viruses can mutate into HPAI viruses, posing a potential risk for more severe outbreaks.Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI):Causes severe disease and high mortality rates in poultry, often leading to sudden death and significant outbreaks.HPAI viruses can devastate poultry populations, leading to significant economic losses and requiring stringent control measures.HPAI viruses are more likely to infect humans and non-poultry livestock, posing a public health risk, though human-to-human transmission remains rare.H5N1 LPAI is considered less severe and has a minor impact on poultry, while H5N1 HPAI is highly virulent, causing severe disease and significant economic and public health concerns, according to the USDA.History of H5N1 HPAI Bird Flu Outbreaks in OklahomaOf the 1,165 H5N1 Bird Flu Outbreaks in the United States, Oklahoma experienced nine from 2022 to 2023. Over 90 million birds have been affected since 2022, according to the CDC.OK CountyOutbreak dateFlock TypeFlock SizeGarfield12/27/2023WOAH Non-Poultry30Grady11/2/2023WOAH Non-Poultry120Wagoner10/31/2023WOAH Non-Poultry50Carter10/16/2023WOAH Non-Poultry80Pawnee12/6/2022WOAH Non-Poultry30Cleveland10/21/2022WOAH Non-Poultry30Creek10/20/2022WOAH Non-Poultry50Tulsa10/14/2022WOAH Non-Poultry30Sequoyah4/30/2022Commercial Broiler Breeder13800This data is provided by the USDA APHIS, Facebook Twitter EmailHelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices© Copyright Gannett 2024Healthy Living: A look at the Avian Influenza Bird Flu virus Accessibility links Skip to main content Skip to main Navigation Skip to Search Link has been copied to clipboard TV Africa 54 Straight Talk Africa Our Voices Red Carpet Healthy Living StartUP Africa Radio Africa News Tonight Daybreak Africa Health Chat Music Time in Africa Nightline Africa Sonny Side of Sports South Sudan in Focus Straight Talk Africa Up Front Video Audio Documentaries Africa USA World South Sudan in Focus Follow Us Languages Search Live Live Search Previous Next Breaking News Healthy Living Home Episodes Articles About Healthy Living: A look at the Avian Influenza Bird Flu virus 19 July 2024 14:04 Embed Healthy Living: A look at the Avian Influenza Bird Flu virus Embed The code has been copied to your clipboard. width px height px Share on Facebook Share on Twitter The URL has been copied to your clipboard No media source currently available 0:00 0:14:58 0:00 Direct link 240p | 41.6MB 360p | 64.4MB 480p | 101.0MB 720p | 227.8MB 1080p | 299.8MB On Healthy Living this week, We shed some light on the highly infectious Avian Influenza Bird Flu virus. Nigerian Veterinary Expert, Dr. Lauratu Lawal Halilu, discusses the Impact of Avian Influenza and some prevention steps. Plus, viewers in Rwanda share their knowledge of bird flu and how they stay safe from food borne illnesses. This and other health related updates, on today's Healthy Living! Share Episodes November 08, 2024 Healthy Living: Medical practitioners use artificial intelligence to improve healthcare November 01, 2024 Healthy Living: Spotlighting Phobias October 25, 2024 Healthy Living: Breast Cancer Awareness October 18, 2024 Healthy Living: Understanding Polio October 11, 2024 Healthy Living: Some Africans turn to spiritual healers to heal sickness October 04, 2024 Healthy Living: Keloids and how they impact skin health See all episodes See TV Programs See Radio Programs Back to top Follow Us Sections Africa South Sudan in Focus USA World Sports Basketball Africa League About This Site About VOA Terms of Use and Privacy Notice Editorials Contact US VOA Usage Requests Programs TV Radio VOA Afaan Oromo Amharic Afrique Hausa Kinyarwanda - Kirundi Ndebele Portugues Shona Somali Tigrigna Zimbabwe XS SM MD LGInfluenza viruses can use two entry points | | UZH Navigation auf uzh.ch Suche Navigation öffnen/schliessen UZH News Quicklinks und Sprachwechsel Home Contact Deutsch Search Main navigation All News Zurück All News All News Menü schliessen For Media Zurück For Media For Media Menü schliessen UZH Magazin Zurück UZH Magazin UZH Magazin Menü schliessen Social Media Zurück Social Media Social Media Menü schliessen More Menü schliessen Home All articles Influenza viruses can use two entry points 17.07.2024 One Health Influenza Viruses Can Use Two Ways to Infect Cells Most influenza viruses enter human or animal cells through specific pathways on the cells’ surface. Researchers at the University of Zurich have now discovered that certain human flu viruses and avian flu viruses can also use a second entry pathway, a protein complex of the immune system, to infect cells. This ability helps the viruses infect different species – and potentially jump between animals and humans. Kategorien Medicine and Dentistry One Health Research Media Releases Bild in Detailansicht öffnen Avian influenza is a serious infection with influenza viruses that affects chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks and other wild waterfowl. In rare cases, the virus can infect spread to humans. (Image: iStockawatchaiprakobkit) The majority of type A influenza viruses circulating in birds and pigs aren’t normally a health risk for humans. However, the viruses may pose a threat if there is an outbreak like the one currently in dairy cattle in the US or during seasonal epidemics. In rare cases, a virus can jump from animals to humans – with potentially devastating consequences such as a global pandemic. Additional receptor offers alternative entry pathway Most influenza viruses enter host cells by using their envelope proteins, which stand up from the surface like spikes. The so-called hemagglutinin binds to sialic acid, a chemical group on the surface of human cells and the cells of various animal species. An international research team led by Professor Silke Stertz from the Institute of Medical Virology at the University of Zurich (UZH) has now shown that flu viruses also have a second method to infect host cells. “Human influenza A viruses of subtype H2N2 and related H2N2 avian influenza viruses can enter cells through a second receptor. They use an alternative entry pathway,” says Stertz. The researchers found that hemagglutinin also binds to MHC class II protein complexes. These complexes on the surface of certain immune and respiratory cells are responsible for differentiating between the body’s own cells and foreign cells. “We found that MHC class II complexes in humans, pigs, ducks, swans and chickens allow viruses to enter cells, but not those in bats,” says Stertz. Transmission from animals to humans likely This dual ability to infect cells was observed in lab-grown cell lines and human airway cultures. How well the viral receptor fits onto the cell surface structures plays a crucial part in determining which host species and tissues are infected and ultimately how severe the infection will be. Receptor specificity also influences whether a virus is able to infect different animal species or even humans (zoonosis). “Our finding shows that influenza viruses can adapt to use different entry pathways. This might influence their ability to infect different species and potentially jump between animals and humans,” emphasizes the UZH virologist. The risk that avian, swine and other animal influenza viruses could trigger a flu pandemic in humans may thus be greater than previously assumed. The ability to use MHC class II proteins for cell entry could have been one of the reasons why H2N2 influenza viruses emerged as a pandemic virus in Asia back in 1957. This is another good reason to step up global influenza surveillance in both animals and humans. Literature: Umut Karakus et al. MHC class II proteins mediate sialic acid independent entry of human and avian H2N2 influenza A viruses. Nature Microbiology. 17 July 2024. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-024-01771-1 Weiterführende Informationen Contact Prof. Dr. Silke Stertz Institute of Medical Virology University of Zurich +41 44 634 28 99 E-mail Dr. Umut Karakus Institute of Medical Virology University of Zurich +41 44 634 26 99 E-mail Footer University of Zurich At a Glance Faculties UZH Events Annual Report Honors Professorial Appointments In Memoriam Subscribe to Newsletter Subscribe to UZH Weekly Subscribe to UZH News Subscribe to Media Releases Contact Communications Team Storytelling & Inhouse Media Team Media Relations Follow us X Facebook Instagram Issuu LinkedIn YouTube Weiterführende Links © 2023 Universität Zürich About this site Contact Accessibility Data Protection StatementNew Bird Flu Discovery Suggests Cows Are a Threat For Future Pandemics : ScienceAlert Space Health Environment Humans Tech Nature Physics Society Opinion Explainer About Us Our Team Follow Us Daily Newsletter Contact Privacy Privacy Manager Accessibility Terms © 2024 ScienceAlert Pty Ltd New Bird Flu Discovery Suggests Cows Are a Threat For Future Pandemics Health14 July 2024By Carly Cassella (Andrew Fox/Getty Images) The potential for the avian flu to jump from birds to cows to humans has some scientists greatly concerned.That very scenario has already occurred twice in the United States since the spring of 2024 – when the first cows in the nation began to fall ill with highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI). Researchers at Iowa State University have now led a study on two dairy cows in Texas that were infected with the H5N1 strain to better understand how these transmissions came about. In the respiratory tissue and mammary glands of both infected cows, the team found receptors used by a whole host of flu strains, including those that originate in birds, pigs, and even humans. With all those receptors hanging out together, it's possible that if a virus infects a cell, it can 'learn its secrets' and mutate to attach to other receptors on the cell as well, such as those commonly found in humans. While bird flu is deadly among avians, it seems to drive a sharp, short-lived, and non-lethal drop in milk production when it infects cows. Dairy cows in the US are the first confirmed cows to have been infected globally, and experts still don't know how the virus, which evolved to infect birds, is spreading from cow to cow. The new study points to the milking process as a mechanism of spread. It identifies H5N1-friendly receptors in cow mammary glands, which helps explain the virus's unusual impact on the animals' milk. Dairy workers say the milk looks thick and discolored when a cow is infected, and if the milk is raw and unpasteurized, scientists suspect it is a source of transmission for other mammals, including ourselves. High levels of the H5N1 virus have been found in contaminated cow milk, according to officials at the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). However, they note, "sporadic human infections with no ongoing spread will not change the CDC risk assessment for the US general public, which CDC considers to be low." Thankfully, the two dairy workers in the US who caught the H5N1 virus from dairy cows experienced only minor symptoms and recovered without infecting anyone else, but the pathogen that infected them did show concerning signs of adaptation to mammal bodies when analyzed by scientists. Whether those adaptations occurred in the dairy cows or the dairy workers is unknown, but scientists at Iowa State are keen to find out more. Influenza A viruses, like H5N1, are known to infect cells via receptors made of sialic acids. Those viral strains that evolved to infect birds prefer certain sialic acid receptors compared to those that evolved to infect mammals. Even down to the species level, influenza A viruses are quite specific about where they attach to cells. Researchers at Iowa State University and the University of Georgia are worried by the expression and distribution of sialic acids they found in the respiratory tract and mammary glands of dairy cows infected with H5N1. Both locations seem to be susceptible to avian influenza, and they show signs of harboring possible viral replication.Microscope images of mammary gland tissue from a dairy cow infected with H5N1. On the left, cells infected with influenza are turquoise and flu receptors are magenta. On the right, infections are bright yellow and receptors are bright red. (Christopher Siepker and Tyler Harm/Iowa State University)Like coronavirus, the influenza virus is "inherently error-prone," the authors write, adding that "infection of new host species gives the virus additional opportunities to replicate and subsequently mutate to be better adapt to novel hosts." "The spread of [influenza A virus] to tissues outside of the respiratory tract is rare," writes the team of researchers. They think it is possible that the mildly acidic environment in the cow mammary gland, coupled with the presence of sialic acid receptors, could predispose cows to H5N1 infection. These hypotheses should be studied further, but the findings underline the "urgent need" to understand how the avian influenza virus is infecting so many mammal species. It's also an important reminder to consumers to always drink pasteurized milk.The study was published in Emerging Infectious Diseases. Trending News Scientists Found a 'Yellow Brick Road' at The Bottom of The Pacific Ocean Nature4 days ago Huge Study Shows Where Gout Comes From, And It's Not What We Thought Health6 days ago One Stage of Sleep Seems to Be Critical in Reducing Dementia Risk Health2 days agoState works to keep bird flu out of Hawaii - Hawaii Tribune-Herald About Print Replica Advertise Contact Us Subscribe Log In Account My Account Email Preferences Change Password Log Out Home Local Volcano coverage Entertainment Merrie Monarch Submit News Email Newsletter Sports Commentary Our Views Your Views Their Views Submit a Letter to the Editor Community Calendar Submit Event Obituaries Features Special Sections Special Section Archives Comics Political Cartoons Horoscopes Puzzles Sudoku Crosswords Word Games Partner Content Partner Videos Classifieds View Notices of Completion Classified FAQ Legal Ads Jobs HTH Jobs Hawaii Jobs Homes Autos Archives Search Please specify a search term. Toggle navigation Subscribe My Account Log In Home Local News Nation and World News Opinion Features Comics Special Sections Partner Videos Legal Ads Homes Print Replica Community Sports Obituaries Calendar Puzzles Partner Content Classifieds Jobs Autos Email Newsletter Contact Us Submit a Letter Submit an Event About Us Frequently Asked Questions Submit a News Story Advertise With Us Log Out Please specify a search term. Monday, Nov. 11, 2024| Today's Paper | 78.152° Hawaii News State works to keep bird flu out of Hawaii By NINA WU Honolulu Star-Advertiser | Wednesday, July 17, 2024, 12:05 a.m. Share this story As the number of dairy cows infected with H5N1 bird flu continues to grow and spread to multiple states in the U.S., Hawaii is hoping to keep the virus away. Hawaii is the only U.S. state in which H5N1, also known as highly pathogenic avian influenza, has not yet been detected, according to state and federal officials — not in wild birds, domestic poultry or mammals, including cows. There have been H5N1 cases detected in wild birds in every U.S. state except Hawaii. ADVERTISING Since first reported in March, the confirmed count of H5N1 among dairy cows has grown to 152 in 12 states as of Saturday, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Four U.S. dairy workers have been infected after exposure to cows. The state Department of Health says the current risk to the general public in Hawaii is low. But is Hawaii still monitoring for it? Absolutely, across multiple pathways, according to state Epidemiologist Dr. Sarah Kemble. State and federal agencies are keeping a close eye on H5N1 as the outbreak among cows continues to grow. “We have a multilayered influenza monitoring strategy in place across species,” she said. “It’s not just cows. It’s people, birds and looking at what safeguards we have in place for dairy cows.” DOH is working with the state Department of Agriculture and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to monitor the presence of H5N1. The state routinely tests human specimens of influenza collected from commercial labs statewide for any novel flu strains, including H5N1. The Hawaii State Laboratory is able to confirm H5N1 with a more specific test. The state also tracks emergency department visits for influenza. Additionally, CDC’s wastewater monitoring program that has so far found no detections of H5N1 from the Sand Island treatment plant in Honolulu, according to Kemble. “They’ve been testing for H5N1 for several months, with no detection of H5N1, which corroborates our low-risk status,” she said. Since 2022 the Hawaii State Laboratory has tested hundreds of domestic birds, including those from Oahu’s largest poultry farm, those that are imported and those that appear to be ill, as part of a routine monitoring program. So far, all tests have come up negative. The U.S. Geological Survey, meanwhile, is collecting samples from live wild birds to test for H5N1. Since 2022 more than 100 test results have been negative. DOH is requesting USGS to increase sampling, especially of migratory birds such as the Pacific golden plover, or kolea, when they return in the fall. Restrictions on cattle The state Department of Agriculture in April placed a restriction on the transport of cattle from areas where H5N1 has been detected. At that time it had been detected in only six states, but that has since doubled to 12, with the highest number of cases, so far, in Colorado, Texas, Michigan and Idaho. Dr. Isaac Maeda, HDOA’s state veterinarian, said this was done out of an abundance of caution, with the restriction placed on all cows. “We just wanted to be cautious about protecting cattle in the state,” Maeda said. “We took that step because there’s still a lot that has to be figured out about this particular virus in cattle. Even the transmission between cow to cow is still kind of in the air somewhat.” On April 27 the USDA implemented a national restriction on the movement of lactating cows, and testing for H5N1 is required before any interstate movement. At the same time, Hawaii has not imported any dairy cows to the U.S. since H5N1 was first detected in the nation, according to state officials. Additionally, Hawaii does not bring in much cattle in from the mainland. Only 22 have been brought in so far this year, according to HDOA’s Animal Industry Division. In 2023 only 61 cattle were imported to Hawaii. Hawaii only has one large, commercial cow dairy farm left: Cloverleaf Dairy on Hawaii island, which does not import cows from off-island. HDOA already restricts the import of poultry and birds originating from areas with significant avian influenza outbreaks to Hawaii. Raw milk debate Health officials continue to recommend that residents not consume raw, unpasteurized milk in Hawaii. DOH recommends against drinking unpasteurized milk because of its potential to carry and transmit pathogens such as E. coli, salmonella and other bacteria that can cause disease. Under Hawaii law, according to DOH, only Grade A pasteurized milk and milk products may be sold to the final consumer or to restaurants. In 2023, House Bill 521 sought to change this for the sale of raw milk directly from producers to consumers, but was deferred. Advocates for the bill said there are nutritional benefits from drinking raw milk and that it would help small dairy farmers and support local agriculture. DOH submitted lengthy testimony opposing the measure due to serious public health concerns, citing data on more than 200 outbreaks due to the consumption of raw milk and raw milk products from 1998 to 2018 in the U.S. The testimony was submitted in 2023, before H5N1 crossed over to dairy cows, but Kemble said it adds yet another reason to avoid consumption of raw milk. Additionally, Kemble recommends getting the influenza vaccine — not formulated for H5N1, but for other seasonal strains — when it becomes available in the fall. This will at least prevent the possibility of getting infected with a seasonal flu strain and avian flu at the same time. CDC, meanwhile, has influenza surveillance systems in place, and has been sequencing influenza cases in humans to monitor for H5N1. “So far, sequencing from cases detected in people is not showing a great propensity to invade the lower respiratory tract and to cause as severe disease as we’ve seen in prior avian flu cases in other countries,” Kemble said. “It’s also not showing a great propensity to transmit person to person so far.” DOH is working with HDOA, she said, to develop a training program and guidelines for dairy workers should avian flu be detected here in Hawaii. Biosafety protocols are already in place, but additional precautions are needed to protect workers. PREVIOUS STORY Merchants have mixed views about county homeless camp NEXT STORY KDEN to perform ‘You’re a Good Man, Charlie Brown’ over 3 weekends Share this story Get the latest news by e-mail Sign Up Most Popular 1 Trump support grows in blue state Hawaii 2 How a Trump presidency could lead to a purge at the Pentagon 3 25 escaped monkeys of 43 are captured in South Carolina 4 Americans voted for Trump. Here’s what they chose — and the hope for all those who didn’t 5 The irony of women voting for abortion rights — and Trump Featured Jobs Featured Jobs Copyright © 2024 Hawaii Tribune-Herald. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms of Service 355 Kinoole Street, Hilo, HI 96720. Telephone: (808) 935-6621 AboutSubscribePrint ReplicaAdvertiseContact UsPlace a Classified AdLegal CenterFAQsNew rapid test detects latest H5N1 variants in humans, cattle | AGDAILY X Toggle navigation Results Quick Links FFA News & Features Ag Insider Diversity in Agriculture Mental Wellness in Ag Farm Babe Columns Signup Watch Featured All AGDAILYTV Sections News Lifestyle Weather Crops Livestock Technology Diversity in Ag Featured News Insights Columnists Farms Farm Show College Guide FFA Signup Work With Us Livestock News Poultry SmartNews Technology New rapid test detects latest H5N1 variants in humans, cattle By AGDAILY Reporters Published: July 18, 2024 Share Tweet Pin Image by branislavpudar, Shutterstock Follow AGDAILY Follow @AGDAILYMedia As more cases of H5N1 pop up around the U.S. and the globe, new vaccines and testing methods are being explored. A new rapid, handheld, point-of-need molecular diagnostic test from Alveo Technologies can detect the variants of avian flu found in the recent Colorado infections of humans and cattle. On July 15 and 16, the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data database released the genetic sequence of the H5N1 viruses that recently infected one of the dairy farm workers in Colorado. Notably, GISAID said that a “mammalian adaptation marker (E627K) was noted in one of the farm workers.” The cattle outbreak has caused enough concern in Europe that the UK Health Security Agency released a report in May increased its assessment of the likelihood that the virus mutates to spread efficiently between people from 0 to 5 percent to between 10 and 35 percent. That being said, “There are up to 198 possible types of influenza B, and some of them are not going to infect people that well, which is the case in H5N1,” Dr. Andrea Love told AGDAILY during an interview in June. Alveo Technologies using in silico (meaning through computer analysis against genetic sequences), –a rapid, hand held point of need molecular diagnostic tool — analyzed their Avian influenza A subtype H5 LAMP tests using recent human and bovine sequences from GISAID. The results indicate that Alveo’s H5 tests match all 12 reported H5 sequences. This means the LAMP Avian influenza test can detect all 12 sequences in clade 4.3.4.4b H5N1, including those found in humans. Alveo says that the Flockscreen LAMP Avian Influenza Molecular Test for poultry, the first diagnostic of its kind can test both cloacal and oropharyngeal samples. The company is now actively working to validate avian influenza diagnostics for both human and bovine use cases. “Avian influenza has already caused enormous damage to the poultry industry and has devastated populations of wild birds,” said Shaun Holt, CEO of Alveo Technologies. “These initial results, indicating we can detect the virus in cattle and humans in addition to poultry, is confirmation of our rigor in the product development process and is very much aligned with our strategic positioning at the intersection of human, animal, and food health.” Sponsored Content on AGDaily Related Idaho meat processor faces $2M lawsuit over payments $3M in prizes awarded to 7 food an ag startups at Grow-NY Kubota partners with Boot Campaign to support veterans AFBF names inaugural Veteran Farmer Award of Excellence recipient Registration now open for Commodity Classic in Denver 2024 harvest analysis points to surge in mycotoxin contamination Crops $3M in prizes awarded to 7 food an ag startups at Grow-NY Registration now open for Commodity Classic in Denver 2024 harvest analysis points to surge in mycotoxin contamination BASF announces EPA approval of Liberty ULTRA herbicide Livestock Idaho meat processor faces $2M lawsuit over payments Turkey prices low ahead of Thanksgiving holiday American Royal sets records for 125th anniversary How one Maryland FFA teen built her own dairy goat legacy Lifestyle Ag on Instagram: The week’s best photos on Nov. 8, 2024 Kubota partners with Boot Campaign to support veterans A look at Louisiana’s farm-themed license plate Decompress from harvest and find the good in people this holiday season Trending articles 7 arrests made in $2.5 million California farm-equipment smuggling ring Farm Babe: Why is ag so quick to criticize instead of support one another? Idaho meat processor faces $2M lawsuit over payments $3M in prizes awarded to 7 food an ag startups at Grow-NY 2025 Kawasaki Brute Force 450: Ready to work, play, and do everything in between Extending the lifespan of farming tools: The role of tungsten carbide The views or opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and may not reflect those of AGDAILY. Video picks 0:30 Maryland Public Television to showcase female farmers 1:58https://www.agdaily.comews/2024-national-farm-safety-week-set-to-kick-off/ Michigan farmer remembers nearly fatal day during harvest 2:52 Farmer Derek’s ‘Dance the Night Away’ wows his cows 3:12 New potato cultivar demonstrates nematode and insect-resistance See more The Carbon Media Network / CarbonTV • OutdoorHub • ActionHub Privacy Policy Copyright Policy Terms Advertise About Us Contact Us © 2016 - 2024 AGDAILY All Rights ReservedCarbon Media Group Agriculture Your Privacy Choices Manage ConsentNew rapid test detects latest H5N1 variants in humans, cattle | AGDAILY X Toggle navigation Results Quick Links FFA News & Features Ag Insider Diversity in Agriculture Mental Wellness in Ag Farm Babe Columns Signup Watch Featured All AGDAILYTV Sections News Lifestyle Weather Crops Livestock Technology Diversity in Ag Featured News Insights Columnists Farms Farm Show College Guide FFA Signup Work With Us Livestock News Poultry SmartNews Technology New rapid test detects latest H5N1 variants in humans, cattle By AGDAILY Reporters Published: July 18, 2024 Share Tweet Pin Image by branislavpudar, Shutterstock Follow AGDAILY Follow @AGDAILYMedia As more cases of H5N1 pop up around the U.S. and the globe, new vaccines and testing methods are being explored. A new rapid, handheld, point-of-need molecular diagnostic test from Alveo Technologies can detect the variants of avian flu found in the recent Colorado infections of humans and cattle. On July 15 and 16, the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data database released the genetic sequence of the H5N1 viruses that recently infected one of the dairy farm workers in Colorado. Notably, GISAID said that a “mammalian adaptation marker (E627K) was noted in one of the farm workers.” The cattle outbreak has caused enough concern in Europe that the UK Health Security Agency released a report in May increased its assessment of the likelihood that the virus mutates to spread efficiently between people from 0 to 5 percent to between 10 and 35 percent. That being said, “There are up to 198 possible types of influenza B, and some of them are not going to infect people that well, which is the case in H5N1,” Dr. Andrea Love told AGDAILY during an interview in June. Alveo Technologies using in silico (meaning through computer analysis against genetic sequences), –a rapid, hand held point of need molecular diagnostic tool — analyzed their Avian influenza A subtype H5 LAMP tests using recent human and bovine sequences from GISAID. The results indicate that Alveo’s H5 tests match all 12 reported H5 sequences. This means the LAMP Avian influenza test can detect all 12 sequences in clade 4.3.4.4b H5N1, including those found in humans. Alveo says that the Flockscreen LAMP Avian Influenza Molecular Test for poultry, the first diagnostic of its kind can test both cloacal and oropharyngeal samples. The company is now actively working to validate avian influenza diagnostics for both human and bovine use cases. “Avian influenza has already caused enormous damage to the poultry industry and has devastated populations of wild birds,” said Shaun Holt, CEO of Alveo Technologies. “These initial results, indicating we can detect the virus in cattle and humans in addition to poultry, is confirmation of our rigor in the product development process and is very much aligned with our strategic positioning at the intersection of human, animal, and food health.” Sponsored Content on AGDaily Related Idaho meat processor faces $2M lawsuit over payments $3M in prizes awarded to 7 food an ag startups at Grow-NY Kubota partners with Boot Campaign to support veterans AFBF names inaugural Veteran Farmer Award of Excellence recipient Registration now open for Commodity Classic in Denver 2024 harvest analysis points to surge in mycotoxin contamination Crops $3M in prizes awarded to 7 food an ag startups at Grow-NY Registration now open for Commodity Classic in Denver 2024 harvest analysis points to surge in mycotoxin contamination BASF announces EPA approval of Liberty ULTRA herbicide Livestock Idaho meat processor faces $2M lawsuit over payments Turkey prices low ahead of Thanksgiving holiday American Royal sets records for 125th anniversary How one Maryland FFA teen built her own dairy goat legacy Lifestyle Ag on Instagram: The week’s best photos on Nov. 8, 2024 Kubota partners with Boot Campaign to support veterans A look at Louisiana’s farm-themed license plate Decompress from harvest and find the good in people this holiday season Trending articles 7 arrests made in $2.5 million California farm-equipment smuggling ring Farm Babe: Why is ag so quick to criticize instead of support one another? Idaho meat processor faces $2M lawsuit over payments $3M in prizes awarded to 7 food an ag startups at Grow-NY 2025 Kawasaki Brute Force 450: Ready to work, play, and do everything in between Extending the lifespan of farming tools: The role of tungsten carbide The views or opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and may not reflect those of AGDAILY. Video picks 0:30 Maryland Public Television to showcase female farmers 1:58https://www.agdaily.comews/2024-national-farm-safety-week-set-to-kick-off/ Michigan farmer remembers nearly fatal day during harvest 2:52 Farmer Derek’s ‘Dance the Night Away’ wows his cows 3:12 New potato cultivar demonstrates nematode and insect-resistance See more The Carbon Media Network / CarbonTV • OutdoorHub • ActionHub Privacy Policy Copyright Policy Terms Advertise About Us Contact Us © 2016 - 2024 AGDAILY All Rights ReservedCarbon Media Group Agriculture Your Privacy Choices Manage ConsentUniversal flu jab ‘could be available within five years’ | The Independent Stay up to date with notifications from The IndependentNotifications can be managed in browser preferences.Not nowYes pleaseJump to contentAsia EditionChangeUK EditionUS EditionEdición en EspañolSign up to our newslettersSubscribe nowLog in / Register IndependentUS electionBlack FridaySubscribeMenuNewsNewsUKUSWorldUK PoliticsBrexitHealthBusinessScienceSpaceNews VideosSportSportFootballParis 2024 OlympicsFormula 1Rugby UnionCricketTennisBoxingUFCCyclingGolfSport VideosVoicesVoicesEditorialsLettersJohn RentoulMary DejevskyAndrew GriceSean O’GradyCultureCultureFilmTV & RadioMusicGamesBooksArtPhotographyTheatre & DanceCulture VideosLifestyleLifestyleShoppingBeauty Fitness & WellbeingTechMoneyFood & DrinkFashionLove & SexWomenHealth & FamiliesRoyal FamilyMotoringElectric Vehicles Car Insurance Deals Lifestyle VideosIndyBestIndyBestAdvisorHome & GardenTechBroadband dealsFashion & BeautyDealsFood & DrinkKidsBooksTravel & OutdoorsSports & FitnessTravelTravelHotel ReviewsNews & AdviceSimon CalderCruisesUKEuropeUSAAsiaAustralia & New ZealandSouth AmericaC. America & CaribbeanMiddle EastMorePremiumPolitics ExplainedEditorialsVoicesLong ReadsNews AnalysisToday’s EditionClimateNewsClimate 100Electric Vehicles VoicesSustainable LivingExplainedClimate VideosSolar Panels SGITVBehind The HeadlinesOn The GroundDecomplicatedYou Ask The QuestionsBinge WatchMusic BoxLove LivesTravel SmartWatch on your TVToday’s EditionCrosswords & PuzzlesMost CommentedNewslettersAsk Me AnythingVirtual EventsWine Offers VouchersIndy100Betting SitesCasino Sites Thank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged inNewsScienceUniversal flu jab ‘could be available within five years’Scientists said their new vaccine technology targets a part of the virus that does not mutate over time.Nilima MarshallFriday 19 July 2024 10:00 BSTArticle bookmarkedFind your bookmarks in your Independent Premium section, under my profileDon't show me this message again✕A new study shows promise for a universal influenza vaccine, according to scientists (David Cheskin/PA) (PA Archive)The best of Voices delivered to your inbox every week - from controversial columns to expert analysisSign up for our free weekly Voices newsletter for expert opinion and columnsSign up to our free weekly Voices newsletterPlease enter a valid email addressPlease enter a valid email addressSIGN UPI would like to be emailed about offers, events and updates from The Independent. Read our privacy policyA jab that protects against every form of flu could be available within five years, scientists have said, after a “promising” trial in animals.The influenza virus is constantly evolving so new vaccines are needed each year to keep it at bay.But researchers in the US said their “innovative” approach targets a part of the virus that does not mutate.An early trial in monkeys showed the vaccine technology, which was designed based on a 100-year-old virus, generated “a robust immune response” against a modern variant.Even after almost 100 years of evolution, the virus can’t change those critically important parts of itselfProf Jonah SachaThe researchers said their work raises hope that a “one and done” vaccine that confers lifelong immunity against an evolving virus could be on the horizon.Jonah Sacha, a professor at the Oregon Health & Science University in the US, said: “It’s exciting because in most cases, this kind of basic science research advances the science very gradually; in 20 years, it might become something.“This could actually become a vaccine in five years or less.”Current flu vaccines target proteins that protrude from the surface of the virus, known as spike proteins.But spike proteins can evolve to elude antibodies, which are produced by the body’s immune system to defend against the virus.Prof Sacha said the flu virus is “always evolving the next variant and we’re always left to chase where the virus was, not where it’s going to be”.For the study, published in the journal Nature Communications, the researchers used a vaccine technology that was originally developed to fight HIV.It worked because the interior protein of the virus was so well preservedProf SachaIt works by using a harmless herpes virus, called cytomegalovirus (CMV), to deliver a piece of genetic code from the flu virus to the cells in the body to mimic an infection.The researchers said this vaccine platform is designed to target the core of the virus, which unlike spike proteins, does not mutate over time.The team tested the jab on 11 monkeys infected with H5N1 – a bird flu virus that experts believe has the potential to become the next human pandemic.But the technology was based on a deadly virus from a century ago that killed around 50 million people worldwide.Six monkeys inoculated against 1918 Spanish flu survived exposure to more contemporary H5N1, the researchers said.In contrast, unvaccinated monkeys in the control group exposed to the H5N1 virus succumbed to the disease, they added.Scientists said their approach targets a specific type of immune cells in the lungs known as effector memory T cells, which is able to recognise proteins in the core of the virus that do not evolve.There is no question we are on the cusp of the next generation of how we address infectious diseaseProf Jonah SachaProf Sacha said: “It worked because the interior protein of the virus was so well preserved.“So much so, that even after almost 100 years of evolution, the virus can’t change those critically important parts of itself.”The team said the study also raises the potential for developing a vaccine against H5N1 in people.Douglas Reed, associate professor of immunology at the University of Pittsburgh’s Centre for Vaccine Research in the US, said: “Should a deadly virus such as H5N1 infect a human and ignite a pandemic, we need to quickly validate and deploy a new vaccine.”The researchers said their vaccine technology, which is licensed by immunology company Vir Biotechnology, could also work on other viruses, such as Sars-CoV-2, which causes Covid-19, to deliver long-lasting immunity.Prof Sacha said: “It’s a massive sea change within our lifetimes.“There is no question we are on the cusp of the next generation of how we address infectious disease.”The research was supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the National Institutes of Health in the US.More aboutPA ReadyScientistsSpanishUniversalNational Institutes of HealthMelinda Gates Foundation1/1Universal flu jab ‘could be available within five years’Universal flu jab ‘could be available within five years’A new study shows promise for a universal influenza vaccine, according to scientists (David Cheskin/PA)PA Archive✕Subscribe to Independent Premium to bookmark this articleWant to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference later? Start your Independent Premium subscription today.SubscribeAlready subscribed? Log inMost PopularPopular videosSponsored FeaturesGet in touchContact usOur ProductsSubscribeRegisterNewslettersToday’s EditionInstall our appArchiveOther publicationsInternational editionsIndependent en EspañolIndependent ArabiaIndependent TurkishIndependent PersianIndependent UrduThe StandardExtrasAdvisorPuzzlesAll topicsBetting OffersVoucher codesCompetitions and offersIndependent AdvertisingIndependent IgniteSyndicationWorking at The IndependentLegalCode of conduct and complaintsContributorsCookie policyPrivacy policyUser policiesModern Slavery StatementThank you for registeringPlease refresh the page or navigate to another page on the site to be automatically logged inPlease refresh your browser to be logged inCloseAsia EditionChangeUK EditionUS EditionEdición en EspañolSubscribeLog in / RegisterUS electionBlack Friday Today’s EditionCrosswords & PuzzlesMost CommentedNewslettersAsk Me AnythingVirtual EventsWine Offers VouchersIndy100Betting SitesCasino Sites ✕Log inEmail addressPasswordEmail and password don't matchSubmitForgotten your password?New to The Independent?RegisterOr if you would prefer:SIGN IN WITH GOOGLEThis site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy notice and Terms of service apply.My Independent PremiumAccount detailsHelp centreLogoutBird flu isn’t spreading in humans for now. But there are vaccines in the pipeline if that changes Menu Close Home Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Edition: Available editions Global Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) España Europe France Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Get newsletter Become an author Sign up as a reader Sign in Search Academic rigour, journalistic flair Marian Weyo/Shutterstock Bird flu isn’t spreading in humans for now. But there are vaccines in the pipeline if that changes Published: July 16, 2024 9.20pm BST Paul Griffin, The University of Queensland Author Paul Griffin Professor, Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, The University of Queensland Disclosure statement Paul Griffin is an Immunisation Coalition Director and Scientific Advisory Board Member. He has received speaker honoraria including from Seqirus, and Sanofi. He has also been a member of Medical Advisory Boards including for AstraZeneca, GSK, MSD, Seqirus, Moderna, and Pfizer Partners University of Queensland provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU. View all partners Email X (Twitter) Facebook LinkedIn WhatsApp Messenger Since May, a number of poultry farms around Australia have faced outbreaks of avian influenza, or bird flu. These outbreaks have been devastating for the poultry farms affected, necessitating large-scale culls, and have caused knock-on effects for the country’s egg supplies. The poultry farm outbreaks have been linked to bird flu strains beginning with H7 (such as H7N3 and H7N8). But the strain causing most concern at present is arguably a different strain – H5N1. This strain is spreading rapidly around the world, and can cause more serious illness and death in poultry, birds and mammals. Experts are warning H5N1 could soon reach Australia. And while bird flu isn’t currently spreading between humans, this could change in the future. So where are we at with vaccines for bird flu? More about bird flu H5N1 first emerged in southern China in 1996. Strains like H5N1 are further broken down into variants called clades. Since emerging in 2020, clade 2.3.4.4b has spread around the world, giving experts cause for concern. Recently, it has been causing outbreaks not only in wild birds and poultry, but also in dairy cows, notably in the United States. While H5N1 is yet to be detected in birds or other wildlife in Australia, as it continues to spread in other regions, there are concerns we’re likely to see it here soon. CSIRO experts have this week warned the risk of H5N1 being imported is higher this year compared with previous years. Fortunately, cases in humans remain rare. Five human cases of H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b have been reported in the US since 2022, all of whom had close contact with dairy cows or poultry, and around ten others elsewhere in the world. There was a single imported human case of H5N1 in Australia in a child who returned from overseas earlier this year, but of a different clade. One of the biggest challenges with influenza viruses is that they can change fairly easily. There’s a possibility that some of these changes may give the virus the ability to transmit more readily from person to person. This could lead to widespread transmission worldwide, or a pandemic. We have some vaccines already Given H5N1 viruses have been around for a while, we actually already have a few vaccines designed to protect against this bird flu strain in the event of sustained transmission in humans. The US approved one from Sanofi Pasteur back in 2007, the European Union approved one from GSK in 2008, and Australia approved one from CSL Limited in the same year. Older H5N1 vaccines were traditional egg-based vaccines, which work by growing the virus in fertilised chicken eggs and deactivating it, then injecting it into the muscle so our immune system can be trained to respond. More recently, CSL Seqirus has created a cell-based H5N1 vaccine. This shot is based on technology already used to manufacture their seasonal flu vaccines, where the virus is grown in cultured cells of mammalian origin (rather than in eggs). Developing a vaccine that doesn’t require chicken eggs to make is sensible in the context of bird flu, which can limit the availability of eggs. Bird flu outbreaks have affected poultry farms in Australia and elsewhere. Photoarte/Shutterstock While the risk in humans remains low, the World Health Organization has suggested humans don’t need to be vaccinated against bird flu at this stage. That said, Finland plans to roll the CSL Seqirus shots out imminently to those at highest risk (people routinely exposed to animals who may be infected), making them the first country to vaccinate against H5N1. While research has suggested existing vaccines produce immune responses that will provide sufficient protection against the currently circulating strains, vaccines based on older versions of H5N1, or even those made more recently, may not be an ideal match for future strains of bird flu. What about mRNA vaccines? mRNA vaccine technology is now well established for COVID, while an mRNA vaccine against RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) was recently approved in the US. mRNA (messenger RNA) vaccines essentially work by giving our immune system instructions to make proteins, usually bits found on the surface of viruses. Our immune system then recognises and responds to these proteins to protect us if we encounter the virus. This technology also offers promise for bird flu vaccines. Moderna began clinical trials for mRNA vaccines against both H5 and H7 strains in 2023 and recently secured funding to continue late-stage development. Other companies including GSK and Pfizer are also working on mRNA vaccines against H5N1. mRNA vaccines have played a significant role during the COVID pandemic. hedgehog94/Shutterstock One of the benefits of this technology is that if the virus changes significantly from the version circulating at a given time, mRNA vaccines can be adapted to these changes quite quickly. Other approaches are also being investigated, including “universal” flu vaccines that could protect from all types of flu. But these are unlikely to be available soon. Being a virus primarily of birds, another strategy is to vaccinate the birds themselves. In some countries where bird flu is consistently found in birds such as Egypt and China, vaccinating poultry in particular has been routine for some time. What next? With the ever-increasing global spread of H5N1 and the growing number of species infected, there are concerns about the potential for this strain to cause a pandemic. If we were to see a bird flu pandemic, fortunately we are perhaps in a better position than ever before to respond. Not only have we learnt a lot in recent years from responses to other infectious diseases, particularly COVID, but technology and capacity to be able to make vaccines rapidly has also come a long way. Vaccination Avian flu H5N1 Health Bird flu Health analysis Events More events Jobs Professor in Physiotherapy Lecturer / Senior Lecturer in Indigenous Knowledges Investigator, Student Academic Misconduct (Multiple Positions Available) Commissioning Editor Nigeria Postdoctoral Research Associate More jobs Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us ​ ​ ​ Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2024, The ConversationPress Release: Press Information Bureau Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying A High-Level Brainstorming Session on Avian Influenza Under One Health Approach The brainstorming session marked a significant step towards a coordinated and comprehensive approach to managing Avian Influenza Posted On: 17 JUL 2024 3:01PM by PIB Delhi The Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying convened a high-level brainstorming session on Avian Influenza, focusing on surveillance and vaccination under the One Health approach. The session took place at Krishi Bhawan on yesterday and was chaired by Secretary of the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying Ms. Alka Upadhyaya. The event was attended by a diverse group of officers and experts. Dr. Rajiv Bahl, Secretary of the Department of Health Research and Director General of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), set the context of the One Health Mission. Participants included senior experts from ICMR Headquarters, ICMR-NIV Pune, CSIR-Centre for Cell and Molecular Biology (CCMB), the National Centre for Disease Control, ICAR-NIHSAD Bhopal, ICAR-NIVEDI Bangalore, and representatives from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Department of Biotechnology, DM Cell, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD). The poultry sector in India plays a crucial role in food security by providing a reliable source of high-quality protein. It significantly contributes to nutritional security and supports livelihoods, particularly in rural areas. The sector, which has grown steadily at a rate of 7-10% over the past decade, also boosts trade and exports, contributing to the country's economic growth. However, recurrent Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) outbreaks hinder its potential and impact exports. Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5 subtype virus is evolving biologically and expanding geographically, with the emergence of well-established genetic lineages. The recent HPAI outbreak in dairy cattle in the USA, with spill over to other mammals, underscores the pandemic potential of HPAI. Addressing this threat requires the One Health approach, integrating human, animal, and environmental health with enhanced coordination and comprehensive strategies. The session featured comprehensive presentations from the Human Health, Animal Husbandry, and Wildlife sectors, highlighting current surveillance protocols and response mechanisms for Avian Influenza outbreaks. The need for enhanced environmental surveillance and updating existing protocols was emphasized. Experts concurred on the necessity of proactive One Health Coordination to prepare for exotic and emergent zoonotic diseases like Avian Influenza. Discussions focused on strengthening surveillance at the interface areas between humans, animals, and wildlife, augmenting active surveillance, and deploying cross-sectoral Joint Response Teams (RRTs). The Influenza A/H5 virus is spreading through poultry and wild birds along well-defined migratory routes. Given India's position along the migratory bird flyway, developing an effective strategy for migratory bird surveillance at water bodies during the winter season is emphasized for early warnings and disease control. Special emphasis is placed on developing SOPs for environmental surveillance using low-cost methods at sites like wet markets, water bodies, wastewater, slaughterhouses, and poultry farms. Following the lead from wastewater screening for COVID and polio virus, CCMB, ICMR, and NIV have initiated research in this area, yielding significant and promising results. The globally available HPAI vaccines typically neither provide sterile immunity nor are 100% effective against all strains. vaccines offer partial immunity, reducing disease severity and viral shedding but not entirely preventing infection. Vaccinated birds can still carry and transmit the virus without exhibiting symptoms, complicating surveillance and outbreak detection. This partial immunity can lead to the emergence of vaccine-resistant strains. Considering these scenarios and the difficulties in ensuring stringent biosecurity and movement restrictions, particularly in the backyard poultry sectors, experts advocate continuing the present strategy of surveillance and culling with no vaccination. However, the need for advanced research for vaccines for both humans and poultry birds is emphasized. ICAR-NIHSAD, Bhopal, which has already commercialized the vaccine technology against Low-Pathogenic Avian Influenza (LPAI-H9N2), has taken a significant lead in developing an indigenous vaccine against HPAI. ICMR is also planning to initiate cell-culture-based vaccines against Avian flu for human use. This brainstorming session marked a significant step towards a coordinated and comprehensive approach to managing Avian Influenza. By leveraging the One Health approach, the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying aims to enhance surveillance, response mechanisms, and vaccine development, thereby mitigating the impact of Avian Influenza and similar zoonotic diseases. ***** SS (Release ID: 2033822) Visitor Counter : 3671 Read this release in: Urdu , Hindi , Hindi_MP , Manipuri , Tamil Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying A High-Level Brainstorming Session on Avian Influenza Under One Health Approach The brainstorming session marked a significant step towards a coordinated and comprehensive approach to managing Avian Influenza Posted On: 17 JUL 2024 3:01PM by PIB Delhi The Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying convened a high-level brainstorming session on Avian Influenza, focusing on surveillance and vaccination under the One Health approach. The session took place at Krishi Bhawan on yesterday and was chaired by Secretary of the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying Ms. Alka Upadhyaya. The event was attended by a diverse group of officers and experts. Dr. Rajiv Bahl, Secretary of the Department of Health Research and Director General of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), set the context of the One Health Mission. Participants included senior experts from ICMR Headquarters, ICMR-NIV Pune, CSIR-Centre for Cell and Molecular Biology (CCMB), the National Centre for Disease Control, ICAR-NIHSAD Bhopal, ICAR-NIVEDI Bangalore, and representatives from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Department of Biotechnology, DM Cell, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD). The poultry sector in India plays a crucial role in food security by providing a reliable source of high-quality protein. It significantly contributes to nutritional security and supports livelihoods, particularly in rural areas. The sector, which has grown steadily at a rate of 7-10% over the past decade, also boosts trade and exports, contributing to the country's economic growth. However, recurrent Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) outbreaks hinder its potential and impact exports. Highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5 subtype virus is evolving biologically and expanding geographically, with the emergence of well-established genetic lineages. The recent HPAI outbreak in dairy cattle in the USA, with spill over to other mammals, underscores the pandemic potential of HPAI. Addressing this threat requires the One Health approach, integrating human, animal, and environmental health with enhanced coordination and comprehensive strategies. The session featured comprehensive presentations from the Human Health, Animal Husbandry, and Wildlife sectors, highlighting current surveillance protocols and response mechanisms for Avian Influenza outbreaks. The need for enhanced environmental surveillance and updating existing protocols was emphasized. Experts concurred on the necessity of proactive One Health Coordination to prepare for exotic and emergent zoonotic diseases like Avian Influenza. Discussions focused on strengthening surveillance at the interface areas between humans, animals, and wildlife, augmenting active surveillance, and deploying cross-sectoral Joint Response Teams (RRTs). The Influenza A/H5 virus is spreading through poultry and wild birds along well-defined migratory routes. Given India's position along the migratory bird flyway, developing an effective strategy for migratory bird surveillance at water bodies during the winter season is emphasized for early warnings and disease control. Special emphasis is placed on developing SOPs for environmental surveillance using low-cost methods at sites like wet markets, water bodies, wastewater, slaughterhouses, and poultry farms. Following the lead from wastewater screening for COVID and polio virus, CCMB, ICMR, and NIV have initiated research in this area, yielding significant and promising results. The globally available HPAI vaccines typically neither provide sterile immunity nor are 100% effective against all strains. vaccines offer partial immunity, reducing disease severity and viral shedding but not entirely preventing infection. Vaccinated birds can still carry and transmit the virus without exhibiting symptoms, complicating surveillance and outbreak detection. This partial immunity can lead to the emergence of vaccine-resistant strains. Considering these scenarios and the difficulties in ensuring stringent biosecurity and movement restrictions, particularly in the backyard poultry sectors, experts advocate continuing the present strategy of surveillance and culling with no vaccination. However, the need for advanced research for vaccines for both humans and poultry birds is emphasized. ICAR-NIHSAD, Bhopal, which has already commercialized the vaccine technology against Low-Pathogenic Avian Influenza (LPAI-H9N2), has taken a significant lead in developing an indigenous vaccine against HPAI. ICMR is also planning to initiate cell-culture-based vaccines against Avian flu for human use. This brainstorming session marked a significant step towards a coordinated and comprehensive approach to managing Avian Influenza. By leveraging the One Health approach, the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying aims to enhance surveillance, response mechanisms, and vaccine development, thereby mitigating the impact of Avian Influenza and similar zoonotic diseases. ***** SS (Release ID: 2033822)Bird Flu Infects 5 People in Colorado After Likely Cow-to-Poultry Spread : ScienceAlert Space Health Environment Humans Tech Nature Physics Society Opinion Explainer About Us Our Team Follow Us Daily Newsletter Contact Privacy Privacy Manager Accessibility Terms © 2024 ScienceAlert Pty Ltd Bird Flu Infects 5 People in Colorado After Likely Cow-to-Poultry Spread Health18 July 2024By Jess Cockerill (Monica Fecke/Getty Images) Bird flu appears to have spread from a Colorado dairy farm to a nearby poultry farm, infecting five human workers who had been tasked with culling the affected birds.The highly infectious virus, avian influenza H5N1, has pandemic potential, and the race is on to create a vaccine to curb its disastrous effects. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) confirmed four of the human cases that sprang from the commercial egg laying business. While the fifth case is pending CDC confirmation, it's also presumed positive at this stage. There's currently not enough evidence to determine the source and route of the poultry farm infection, but it's hypothesized that the virus jumped from dairy cattle to the poultry farm. "Genomic sequencing of samples from the poultry operation confirms the same type of genotype of highly pathogenic avian influenza that is in the nearby dairy herds," acting senior adviser Eric Deeble from the US Department of Agriculture said at a press briefing on Tuesday, recorded by CBS journalist Alexander Tin. This isn't enough to trace the virus's interspecies travels, but it does suggest the virus is capable of thriving in a variety of animal hosts, without having to mutate much. This possibility has scientists greatly concerned. The more species a virus can jump between, the more efficiently it can spread. Cows in the US first began to contract avian flu earlier this year, with the virus spreading to two humans. "CDC's assessment of the risk to the general population remains low, and CDC has not changed its recommendations," principal deputy director of the CDC Nirav Shah said in the press briefing. "For example, CDC is not recommending H5 specific vaccines for livestock workers given the mild symptoms that have been noted thus far, and the absence of any changes to the virus's genetic makeup that would suggest that the risk to human health is increased." He said a preliminary analysis of the virus's genes, collected from one of the infected poultry farm patients, did not show any mutations of concern. "The sequence is very closely related to two sequences from infected chickens from the farm where the worker was likely exposed," Shah said. "And in addition to that, one of the virus's subunits was 100 percent identical to the Texas and the first human case from Michigan." While symptoms in humans so far seem to be mild, and recovery speedy, the greater concern may be the impact this could have on agriculture. The milk from cows with the virus is rendered unsafe for consumption, and culling to prevent further spread – like the 1.8 million birds at the Colorado poultry farm in question – leaves a massive dent in livestock numbers. It's these culls that appear to place humans at higher risk of infection. The five infected workers were among employees tasked with loading birds into carbon dioxide gas chambers for culling, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment reports. "There were large scale industrial fans that certainly helped keep the barns cool, but those fans also spread things like feathers around, which are known to carry the virus," Shah said. "In addition, the culling method that was used here entailed workers moving from chicken to chicken, increasing the degree of interaction with each potentially infected bird." While PPE for this unpleasant task is usually extensive, workers likely struggled to maintain these measures as the temperatures in Colorado climbed to at least up to nearly 40 °C (104 °F) on the day, Shah said at the briefing.An industrial hygienist has been enlisted to investigate strategies for better transmission prevention. Trending News Huge Study Shows Where Gout Comes From, And It's Not What We Thought Health2 days ago We Finally Know Why Ancient Roman Concrete Was Able to Last Thousands of Years Physics6 days ago One Super Predator in Africa Instills Even More Fear Than Lions Nature2 days agoH5N1 confirmed in at least 4 poultry workers | WATTPoultry.comMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSign InPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureRegionsMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesTop Feed CompaniesAgriculture ProductsDirectory of SuppliersEvent CalendarExpert InsightsWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesMoreSign InSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconSign InFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMarket InformationTop Poultry CompaniesExpert InsightsBlogsRegionsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseBroilers & TurkeysDiseases & HealthAvian InfluenzaH5N1 confirmed in at least 4 poultry workersA fifth potential case in Colorado awaits confirmation by the CDC.Roy GraberJuly 15, 2024JegasRa | BigstockThe U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that four workers responding to an H5N1 avian influenza outbreak in Colorado have confirmed cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) while a fifth worker is a presumed-positive case.According to a press release from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE), the workers were culling poultry at a commercial laying hen operation in the state and exhibited mild symptoms, including conjunctivitis and common respiratory infection symptoms. However, none of the patients required hospitalization.State epidemiologists believe the poultry workers’ cases are a result of working directly with infected poultry.According to CDPHE, three of the confirmed human cases are from samples that the State Public Health Laboratory sent to CDC on July 12 for confirmatory testing. The fourth case was an additional presumptive detected by the state lab later that evening that was since confirmed by the CDC.Samples from a fifth worker were presumed positive at the state lab on July 13 and will be sent to CDC for confirmation.No additional test results are pending at this time.CDPHE did not identify the farm where they were working, or the exact location, other than stating it was in northeast Colorado. Information from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) shows that the last confirmed instance of HPAI in a commercial layer operation was confirmed in Weld County on July 8. No other layer operations in the state have been affected by HPAI in 2024.These latest confirmed cases have doubled the number of H5N1 cases in humans in the United States in 2024, with the other cases being confirmed in people who were working with dairy cattle that had been infected by H5N1. One other case had been confirmed in Colorado, one was in Texas and two were in Michigan. View our continuing coverage of the global avian influenza situation. RecommendedHatchersGiordano HatchCargoSystem ProLifeLatest NewsNational Turkey Federation offering 'Thanksgiving 101' tips and recipesRelated StoriesAvian InfluenzaMinnesota breeder toms struck by avian influenzaAvian InfluenzaAvian flu hits 2 Minnesota turkey breeder hen flocksAvian InfluenzaEurope urged to prepare for next avian flu seasonAvian InfluenzaMore understanding needed on HPAI spread in wild birdsMore in Avian InfluenzaAvian InfluenzaAvian flu confirmed in poultry flocks in 13 European countriesThe H5N5 variant has been confirmed for the first time at a European poultry farm.Brand InsightsVaccination success depends on crew trainingZoetisContinuous evaluation and training are critical to improving pullet vaccination accuracy.Avian Influenza8 more British Columbia flocks struck by avian fluSo far in 2024, the province has had 22 commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus.Avian InfluenzaLatest Canadian HPAI infections involved variety of speciesOne more flock infection has been reported in Abbotsford, British Columbia.Avian InfluenzaHPAI hits 5 flocks in British Columbia, 1 in CaliforniaAPHIS provides additional information concerning two broiler flocks previously reported as confirmed cases.Avian InfluenzaAustralia commits more funds to H5N1 preparednessAustralian authorities add additional funds to surveillance, biosecurity, vaccines and communications in the face of possible H5N1 incursion.Avian InfluenzaAPHIS updates report on California HPAI casesFlock size numbers for two of four affected operations have been disclosed.Avian InfluenzaMore HPAI reported in California, British Columbia poultryBoth the state and the province have confirmed cases in two commercial flocks.Avian InfluenzaFirst avian flu outbreaks of the season in East AsiaHPAI cases have been reported in poultry and wild birds across Asia from Israel to Japan and South Korea.Avian InfluenzaAvian influenza strikes two California broiler flocksThe number of chickens involved has not yet been disclosed.North AmericaAvian flu infections continue to hit British ColumbiaThe province has had six commercial poultry flocks affected by the virus since October 21.Avian InfluenzaFrance confirms avian flu in vaccinated flocksDucks were found to be positive for the HPAI virus following routine testing, despite them showing no symptoms of the disease.Avian InfluenzaAvian flu hits second broiler flock in California countyThe latest flock infection in Tulare County involved 6,000 broilers.Page 1 of 182Next PageNews and analysis for the global poultry industryFollow WATTPoultry.comFacebook iconLinkedIn iconYouTube iconDelete My DataTopicsPoultry MeatEggPoultry HealthSustainabilityPoultry FutureMoreWebinarsBrand InsightsPodcastsWhite PapersWATT Poultry ChatTop Companies Data DownloadsMagazinesSubscribeAdvertiseAbout UsContact UsMedia RequestPrivacy PolicySite Map© 2024 All rights reserved.Improved protection of pigs against influenza viruses: Two new vaccine candidates successfully tested | Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut Jump directly to main navigation Jump directly to content Jump to sub navigation Contrast Deutsch Data Protection Barrierefreiheit Leichte Sprache Gebärdensprache Contact Site map To homepage News Short Messages Events Animal Disease Situation Mpox (formerly monkeypox) African swine fever Avian Influenza (AI) / Fowl Plague Equine Infectious Anemia Bee Diseases Bluetongue Disease Bornaviruses Coronavirus Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) Hantavirus Infections Rabbit Haemorrhagic Disease Lumpy Skin Disease Foot and Mouth Disease Schmallenberg Virus Usutu Virus West Nile Virus About us The FLI Affiliations Institutes Central Department Committees and Commissioners Institute Council of the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut Commissioners Data Protection Supervisor IT Security Officer Animal Welfare Officer (AWO) Management Research Coordination Press and Public Relations Information and Documentation Friedrich Loeffler History FLI Riems FLI Braunschweig FLI Celle FLI Jena FLI Mariensee FLI Tübingen FLI Wusterhausen Loeffler-Haus 100 Years Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut High containment laboratories Biosecurity Quality Management Scientific Advisory Board of the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut Supporting Associations Institutes Institute of Bacterial Infections and Zoonoses (IBIZ) Scientists Prof. Dr. Heinrich Neubauer PD Dr. H. Tomaso Dr. M. Abdel Glil Dr. M. Böhringer Dr. H. H. El-Adawy Dr. M. Elschner Dr. J. Linde Dr. F. Melzer Dr. K. Mertens-Scholz PD Dr. U. Methner Dr. G. Schmoock Dr. C. Seyboldt Dr. L. Sprague PD Dr. G. Wareth Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRL for Brucellosis WOAH and NRL for Glanders NRL for Campylobacteriosis NRL for Ovine Epididymitis NRL for Contagious Equine Metritis NRL for Anthrax NRL for Q Fever NRL for Blackleg NRL for Salmonellosis in Cattle NRL for Trichomonosis of Cattle NRL for Tularemia NRL for Bovine Genital Campylobacteriosis (BGC) NRL for Tick-borne Diseases Labs/Working Groups Working group Bacterial Zoonoses of Companion Animals Laboratory for Sequencing and for Proteomics Working group Campylobacter and Tularemia Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) Bioinformatics Working group Clostridia Working group L3-agents Laboratory of Bacterial Biological Agents and Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria Working group Rickettsiology Working group Salmonella Institute of Epidemiology (IfE) Scientists Prof. Dr. C. Sauter-Louis, PhD Dr. Dr. Hannes Bergmann PD Dr. N. Denzin Dr. J. M. Gethmann Dr. T. Homeier-Bachmann Dr. Pavlo Maksimov Dr. L. Rogoll Dr. G. Schares Dr. J. Schulz PD Dr. K. Schulz Dr. C. Staubach Reference Laboratories NRL for Dourine NRL for Echinococcosis NRL for Toxoplasmosis NRL for Surra Working groups WG Participatory Epidemiology WG Antimicrobial Resistance Working Group Digital and mathematical Epidemiology Working group Forensics in Wild Boar Working Group Immuno-Epidemiology Working Group Artificial Intelligence and Data Accelerator Working group Neospora caninum Working group Animal Health Economics Epidemiological Advisory Group TSN – The Animal Disease Reporting System Research projects Archives Institute of Immunology (IfI) Scientists Prof. Dr. A. Dorhoi Dr. U. Blohm Dr. B. Corleis Dr. G. Goyette-Desjardins PD Dr. R. Kammerer PD Dr. M. R. Knittler Dr. B. Köllner Dr. C. Luttermann Dr. G. Pei Labs / Working groups Laboratory for Adaptive Immunity Laboratory for Innate Immunity and Inflammation Laboratory for Antiviral Immunity Laboratory for Immunogenetics Laboratory for Humoral Immunology and Glycobiology Laboratory for Mucosal Immunology and Vaccinology Laboratory for Comparative Immunology Laboratory for Cell-Autonomous and Cellular Immunity Laboratory for Cellular Stress Response and Immune Regulation Institute of Infectology (IMED) Scientists Prof. Dr. Cornelia Silaghi Dr. S. Fischer Dr. K. Franzke PD Dr. H. Kampen Dr. M. O. Schäfer Dr. M. Schäfer Dr. H. Schütze Dr. B. A. Tews Dr. S. Woelke Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRLs for Bee diseases NRL for EHN NRL for IHN NRL for ISA NRL for KHV Disease NRL for Crustacean Diseases NRL for Mollusc Diseases NRL for VHS Projects Laboratories Laboratory for applied Biomathematics Laboratory for Bee Diseases Laboratory for Electron Microscopy Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases Laboratory for Fish Virology Laboratory for Medical Entomology Laboratory for molecular Vector-Pathogen Interaction Laboratory for Mosquito Monitoring Laboratory for Vector Capacity Institute of International Animal Health/One Health (IITG Scientists Prof. S. Knauf, PhD Dr. K. R. Depner Dr. K. Dietze Dr. A. Fahrion Dr. A. Globig Working Groups Working group Development cooperation and Disease Intelligence Working group Transboundary Animal Disease Management AG Veterinary Public Health Workgroup Wildlife Health and Disease Reservoir Systems Cooperations Institute of Molecular Pathogenesis (IMP) Scientists Prof. Dr. C. Menge Prof. Dr. T. M. Fuchs Dr. S. A. Barth Dr. C. Berens PD Dr. A. Berndt Dr. J.-D. Häger Dr. H. Köhler Prof. Dr. E. M. Liebler-Tenorio Dr. S. Mamerow Dr. P. Möbius Dr. C. Schnee Dr. E. Schubert Dr. Michael Weber Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRL for Chlamydiosis NRL for Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia NRL for Paratuberculosis NRL for Bovine Tuberculosis NRL for VTEC Laboratories / Working Groups Working group Chlamydiae and Mycoplasmas Working group Infection and Immunity Research area Poultry Research area Ruminants Working group Pathobiology of Mycobacterioses Working group Pathogenomics Working group Pathology and Pathophysiology Research area of Pathophysiology Research area of Pathology and Electron Microscopy Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology (IMVZ) Scientists Prof. Dr. S. Finke Dr. F. Butter Dr. E.-S. M. Abdel-Whab Dr. C. Freuling Dr. W. Fuchs PD Dr. A. Groseth PD Dr. T. Hoenen Dr. A. Karger Dr. B. Klupp Dr. T. Müller Dr. D. Ushakov PD Dr. habil. J. Stech Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRL for Rabies NRL for AK NRL for ILT Laboratories Laboratory for Arenavirus Biology Laboratory for Imaging and Bioinformatics Laboratory for Avian Influenza Laboratory for Biochemistry and Protein Analysis Laboratory for Herpesvirus-Host Cell Interactions Laboratory for Asfar and Animal Herpes Viruses Laboratory for Integrative Cell and Infection Biology Laboratory for Molecular Biology of Rhabdo and Paramyxoviruses Influenza Virus Molecular Pathogenesis and Ecology Laboratory Laboratory of Proteomics and Systems Biology Institute of Farm Animal Genetics (ING) General History and Development Collaborations Scientists Prof. Dr. C. Klein, PhD Dr. S. Altgilbers Dr. L. Carvalheira Dr. J. Geibel Dr. H. Henning R. Herbicht Dr. S. Klein Prof. Dr. W. A. Kues S. Kurtz, PhD Dr. C. Reimer Prof. Dr. S. Weigend Dr. Y. Zheng Departments / Working Groups Department of Biotechnology Department of Breeding and Genetic Resources German Gene Bank Experimental Station Mariensee/Mecklenhorst Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases (INNT Scientists Prof. Dr. M. H. Groschup PD Dr. A. Balkema-Buschmann Dr. S. Diederich Dr. M. Eiden Dr. C. Fast Dr. K. Fischer Dr. M. Keller Dr. B. Sadeghi Dr. D. Thal Prof. Dr. R. G. Ulrich Dr. U. Ziegler Reference Laboratories NRL for CCHF NRL for EEV NRL for Filoviruses NRL for Hantaviruses NRL for Henipaviruses NRL for JEV NRL for RVFV NRL for SARS-CoV-2 NRL for TSEs NRL for WNV Projects Archives National Research Platform for Zoonoses Institute of Animal Nutrition (ITE) Scientists Prof. Dr. Dr. S. Dänicke Dr. U. Meyer Dr. E. Bannert Dr. F. Billenkamp Dr. S. Bühler Dr. J. Frahm Dr. A. Grümpel-Schlüter Dr. L. Hüther Dr. S. Kersten Dr. J. Klüß Dr. M. Kölln N. Kröncke P. Mertens Dr. J. Saltzmann Dr. D. von Soosten Dr. C. Unruh Working Groups Working group Ruminant nutrition Working group Non-ruminant nutrition Working group Basic analytics Working group Immuno-Nutrition Working group Carry Over Working group Molecular Microbiology and Bioinformatics Data management and digitalization Experimental station Braunschweig Experimental facilities Institute of Animal Welfare and Animal Husbandry (ITT) Scientists Prof. Dr. L. Schrader Dr. I. Wilk Dr. T. Bartels Dr. S. Dippel Dr. K. Kauselmann Dr. J. Knöll Dr. E.T. Krause Dr. A. Patt Dr. A. Riek Dr. H. Schomburg Dr. A. Schubbert Departments Research field: Animal-friendly and sustainable husbandry systems Archives Research field Behavioural demands and disorders Archives Research about tail biting Research field Methods for assessing animal welfare Archives Research field animal welfare-friendly stunning and killing Archives Experimental Station Celle Institute of Diagnostic Virology (IVD) Scientists Prof. Dr. M. Beer PD Dr. S. Blome Dr. M. Eschbaumer PD Dr. C. Grund Prof. Dr. T. Harder, PhD Dr. D. Höper Dr. B. Hoffmann PD Dr. D. Hoffmann Dr. P. König Dr. F. Pfaff Dr. A. Pohlmann PD Dr. D. Rubbenstroth, PhD Dr. K. Schlottau PD Dr. K. Wernike Reference Laboratories NRL for Mpox (formerly monkeypox) NRL for AHS WOAH, FAO and NRL for AI NRL for ASF WOAH and NRL for BHV-1 NRL for Bornaviruses NRL for BTV WOAH and NRL for BVD/MD NRL for CAE NRL for EBL NRL for EHD NRL for EIA NRL for EVA FAO and NRL for CSF NRL for LSD NRL for FMD, SVD, VS NRL for MV WOAH, FAO and NRL for ND NRL for Sheep and Goat Pox NRL for PPR NRL for RP NRL for SARS-CoV-2 NRL for SBV Consiliary laboratory CL for RHD-Virus Laboratories / Working Groups Laboratory for Applied Bioinformatics and Sequencing of Viral Genomes and Transcriptomes Laboratory for Biocuration Laboratory for Molecular Virus Characterization Laboratory for NGS-based pathogen characterization and animal disease diagnostics Laboratory for phylogenetic analyses with emphasis on influenza viruses and borna viruses Projects Department of Experimental Animal Facilities and Biorisk Management (ATB) Scientists Prof. Dr. J. P. Teifke Dr. S. Reiche Dr. A. Breithaupt Dr. J. Heidrich Dr. S. Kohler Dipl. Biol. M. Lenk Dr. C. Schröder Dr. J. Sehl-Ewert Dipl. Biol. M. Streitz Dr. C. Wylezich Laboratories Laboratories for pathology Laboratory for Pathology I Laboratory for Pathology II Laboratory for Experimental Animal Husbandry and Bacteriology Laboratory for the Generation of Monoclonal Antibodies Bio Bank BSL4-Manager Projects Licensing Authority Career Vacancies Young Academics Graduate School Vocational Training Work and Family Services National Reference Laboratories List of Animal Diseases Legal Basis National Contact Point according to the EU regulations on Animal Welfare at the time of killing Bio Bank German Gene Bank Licensing Authority Libraries Information systems and databases EURL CSF / ASF Database GIS TRACES TSIS TSN Manuals of the LAV Working Group Animal Welfare Publications Overview OPEN AGRAR Radar Bulletin Germany Amtliche Methodensammlung Aktualisierungen Methodensammlung Richtlinie zur Desinfektion bei Tierseuchen Risk Assessments Information on animal diseases Informationen zu Tierschutz und Tierhaltung Annual Animal Health Reports The LabLoeffler The „Loeffler“ Special Publications Publication lists Press Press Office Press Releases Historical Exhibition Commissions Overview National Expert Group ‚Mosquitoes as Vectors of Disease Agents‘ Geschäftsstelle Veranstaltungen Mitglieder Standing Committee on Vaccination for Veterinary Medicine To search page Search Search Open the search bar Open the menu Search Search short message Home News Short Messages Short Message Improved protection of pigs against influenza viruses: Two new vaccine candidates successfully tested 07/15/2024 Short Messages The Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI) reports improved protection of pigs against influenza viruses. The study "Novel recombinant vaccines provide improved protection against influenza in piglets" has now been published in the journal "npj vaccines". It was carried out jointly by the FLI on the island of Riems-Greifswald (Timm Harder group), the Institute of Virology at the University of Freiburg (Martin Schwemmle group) and the Institute of Virology and Immunology (IVI) in Bern/Mittelhäusern (Gert Zimmer group).Influenza A viruses cause an economically important respiratory disease in modern pig production. This can lead to continuous virus transmission between animals, which is difficult to control. Conventional vaccines based on inactivated influenza viruses, which are almost exclusively used in sows, cannot completely solve the problem. The aim of this study was to test new vaccine candidates that could also be used directly in piglets.To this end, piglets from an affected herd were immunised with two novel recombinant vaccines. The first vaccine was a live attenuated vaccine based on a bat influenza virus that is unable to exchange gene segments with pig or human influenza A viruses. The other vaccine was based on RNA replicon particles derived from a vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) that is unable to replicate. Both vaccines contained the genetic information for proteins of a swine influenza virus against which protective immunity was to be induced. In stress infections of the animals with a swine influenza virus, the new recombinant vaccines provided clearly improved protection compared to two conventional vaccines.The two new vaccine candidates could help to interrupt the continuous transmission of influenza A viruses in pig herds. This would improve the health status of the animals and also reduce the risk of transmission of swine influenza viruses to humans.This study was funded by the European ICRAD project "PIGIE" (number 2821ERA24), the Swiss National Fund (grant number IZCOZO_189903) and the German Research Foundation (grant number DFG-434507207).PublicationGraaf-Rau, A., Schmies, K., Breithaupt, A. et al. Reassortment incompetent live attenuated and replicon influenza vaccines provide improved protection against influenza in piglets. npj Vaccines 9, 127 (2024).DOI: 10.1038/s41541-024-00916-x Young domestic pigs in the barn (© W. Maginot, FLI) Back Institutes Institute of Bacterial Infections and Zoonoses (IBIZ)Institute of Epidemiology (IfE)Institute of Immunology (IfI)Institute of Infectology (IMED)Institute of International Animal Health/One Health (IITGInstitute of Molecular Pathogenesis (IMP)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology (IMVZ)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics (ING)Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases (INNTInstitute of Animal Nutrition (ITE)Institute of Animal Welfare and Animal Husbandry (ITT)Institute of Diagnostic Virology (IVD)Department of Experimental Animal Facilities and Biorisk Management (ATB) WOAH Collaborating Centre for Zoonoses in Europe WOAH Reference Laboratories for Avian Influenza (Poultry)Avian and Ovine ChlamydiosisBee diseasesBovine Herpesvirus Type 1 InfectionBovine Viral DiarrheaBrucellosisGlandersKoi Herpesvirus DiseaseNewcastle DiseaseRabies WHO Collaborating Centre for Rabies Surveillance and Research FAO Reference Centres for Animal Influenza and Newcastle Disease of PoultryClassical Swine FeverEmerging Zoonotic Pathogens and High Biosecurity/Biocontainment Facilities Contact Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut Südufer 10 17493 Greifswald - Insel Riems Telephone: +49 (0)38351 7-0 Fax: +49 (0)38351 7-1151internetredaktion@~@fli.de © FLI 2024 Le­gal No­tice News Short Messages Events Animal Disease Situation Mpox (formerly monkeypox) African swine fever Avian Influenza (AI) / Fowl Plague Equine Infectious Anemia Bee Diseases Bluetongue Disease Bornaviruses Coronavirus Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) Hantavirus Infections Rabbit Haemorrhagic Disease Lumpy Skin Disease Foot and Mouth Disease Schmallenberg Virus Usutu Virus West Nile Virus About us The FLI Affiliations Institutes Central Department Committees and Commissioners Institute Council of the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut Commissioners Data Protection Supervisor IT Security Officer Animal Welfare Officer (AWO) Management Research Coordination Press and Public Relations Information and Documentation Friedrich Loeffler History FLI Riems FLI Braunschweig FLI Celle FLI Jena FLI Mariensee FLI Tübingen FLI Wusterhausen Loeffler-Haus 100 Years Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut High containment laboratories Biosecurity Quality Management Scientific Advisory Board of the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut Supporting Associations Institutes Institute of Bacterial Infections and Zoonoses (IBIZ) Scientists Prof. Dr. Heinrich Neubauer PD Dr. H. Tomaso Dr. M. Abdel Glil Dr. M. Böhringer Dr. H. H. El-Adawy Dr. M. Elschner Dr. J. Linde Dr. F. Melzer Dr. K. Mertens-Scholz PD Dr. U. Methner Dr. G. Schmoock Dr. C. Seyboldt Dr. L. Sprague PD Dr. G. Wareth Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRL for Brucellosis WOAH and NRL for Glanders NRL for Campylobacteriosis NRL for Ovine Epididymitis NRL for Contagious Equine Metritis NRL for Anthrax NRL for Q Fever NRL for Blackleg NRL for Salmonellosis in Cattle NRL for Trichomonosis of Cattle NRL for Tularemia NRL for Bovine Genital Campylobacteriosis (BGC) NRL for Tick-borne Diseases Labs/Working Groups Working group Bacterial Zoonoses of Companion Animals Laboratory for Sequencing and for Proteomics Working group Campylobacter and Tularemia Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) Bioinformatics Working group Clostridia Working group L3-agents Laboratory of Bacterial Biological Agents and Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria Working group Rickettsiology Working group Salmonella Institute of Epidemiology (IfE) Scientists Prof. Dr. C. Sauter-Louis, PhD Dr. Dr. Hannes Bergmann PD Dr. N. Denzin Dr. J. M. Gethmann Dr. T. Homeier-Bachmann Dr. Pavlo Maksimov Dr. L. Rogoll Dr. G. Schares Dr. J. Schulz PD Dr. K. Schulz Dr. C. Staubach Reference Laboratories NRL for Dourine NRL for Echinococcosis NRL for Toxoplasmosis NRL for Surra Working groups WG Participatory Epidemiology WG Antimicrobial Resistance Working Group Digital and mathematical Epidemiology Working group Forensics in Wild Boar Working Group Immuno-Epidemiology Working Group Artificial Intelligence and Data Accelerator Working group Neospora caninum Working group Animal Health Economics Epidemiological Advisory Group TSN – The Animal Disease Reporting System Research projects Archives Institute of Immunology (IfI) Scientists Prof. Dr. A. Dorhoi Dr. U. Blohm Dr. B. Corleis Dr. G. Goyette-Desjardins PD Dr. R. Kammerer PD Dr. M. R. Knittler Dr. B. Köllner Dr. C. Luttermann Dr. G. Pei Labs / Working groups Laboratory for Adaptive Immunity Laboratory for Innate Immunity and Inflammation Laboratory for Antiviral Immunity Laboratory for Immunogenetics Laboratory for Humoral Immunology and Glycobiology Laboratory for Mucosal Immunology and Vaccinology Laboratory for Comparative Immunology Laboratory for Cell-Autonomous and Cellular Immunity Laboratory for Cellular Stress Response and Immune Regulation Institute of Infectology (IMED) Scientists Prof. Dr. Cornelia Silaghi Dr. S. Fischer Dr. K. Franzke PD Dr. H. Kampen Dr. M. O. Schäfer Dr. M. Schäfer Dr. H. Schütze Dr. B. A. Tews Dr. S. Woelke Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRLs for Bee diseases NRL for EHN NRL for IHN NRL for ISA NRL for KHV Disease NRL for Crustacean Diseases NRL for Mollusc Diseases NRL for VHS Projects Laboratories Laboratory for applied Biomathematics Laboratory for Bee Diseases Laboratory for Electron Microscopy Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases Laboratory for Fish Virology Laboratory for Medical Entomology Laboratory for molecular Vector-Pathogen Interaction Laboratory for Mosquito Monitoring Laboratory for Vector Capacity Institute of International Animal Health/One Health (IITG Scientists Prof. S. Knauf, PhD Dr. K. R. Depner Dr. K. Dietze Dr. A. Fahrion Dr. A. Globig Working Groups Working group Development cooperation and Disease Intelligence Working group Transboundary Animal Disease Management AG Veterinary Public Health Workgroup Wildlife Health and Disease Reservoir Systems Cooperations Institute of Molecular Pathogenesis (IMP) Scientists Prof. Dr. C. Menge Prof. Dr. T. M. Fuchs Dr. S. A. Barth Dr. C. Berens PD Dr. A. Berndt Dr. J.-D. Häger Dr. H. Köhler Prof. Dr. E. M. Liebler-Tenorio Dr. S. Mamerow Dr. P. Möbius Dr. C. Schnee Dr. E. Schubert Dr. Michael Weber Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRL for Chlamydiosis NRL for Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia NRL for Paratuberculosis NRL for Bovine Tuberculosis NRL for VTEC Laboratories / Working Groups Working group Chlamydiae and Mycoplasmas Working group Infection and Immunity Research area Poultry Research area Ruminants Working group Pathobiology of Mycobacterioses Working group Pathogenomics Working group Pathology and Pathophysiology Research area of Pathophysiology Research area of Pathology and Electron Microscopy Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology (IMVZ) Scientists Prof. Dr. S. Finke Dr. F. Butter Dr. E.-S. M. Abdel-Whab Dr. C. Freuling Dr. W. Fuchs PD Dr. A. Groseth PD Dr. T. Hoenen Dr. A. Karger Dr. B. Klupp Dr. T. Müller Dr. D. Ushakov PD Dr. habil. J. Stech Reference Laboratories WOAH and NRL for Rabies NRL for AK NRL for ILT Laboratories Laboratory for Arenavirus Biology Laboratory for Imaging and Bioinformatics Laboratory for Avian Influenza Laboratory for Biochemistry and Protein Analysis Laboratory for Herpesvirus-Host Cell Interactions Laboratory for Asfar and Animal Herpes Viruses Laboratory for Integrative Cell and Infection Biology Laboratory for Molecular Biology of Rhabdo and Paramyxoviruses Influenza Virus Molecular Pathogenesis and Ecology Laboratory Laboratory of Proteomics and Systems Biology Institute of Farm Animal Genetics (ING) General History and Development Collaborations Scientists Prof. Dr. C. Klein, PhD Dr. S. Altgilbers Dr. L. Carvalheira Dr. J. Geibel Dr. H. Henning R. Herbicht Dr. S. Klein Prof. Dr. W. A. Kues S. Kurtz, PhD Dr. C. Reimer Prof. Dr. S. Weigend Dr. Y. Zheng Departments / Working Groups Department of Biotechnology Department of Breeding and Genetic Resources German Gene Bank Experimental Station Mariensee/Mecklenhorst Institute of Novel and Emerging Infectious Diseases (INNT Scientists Prof. Dr. M. H. Groschup PD Dr. A. Balkema-Buschmann Dr. S. Diederich Dr. M. Eiden Dr. C. Fast Dr. K. Fischer Dr. M. Keller Dr. B. Sadeghi Dr. D. Thal Prof. Dr. R. G. Ulrich Dr. U. Ziegler Reference Laboratories NRL for CCHF NRL for EEV NRL for Filoviruses NRL for Hantaviruses NRL for Henipaviruses NRL for JEV NRL for RVFV NRL for SARS-CoV-2 NRL for TSEs NRL for WNV Projects Archives National Research Platform for Zoonoses Institute of Animal Nutrition (ITE) Scientists Prof. Dr. Dr. S. Dänicke Dr. U. Meyer Dr. E. Bannert Dr. F. Billenkamp Dr. S. Bühler Dr. J. Frahm Dr. A. Grümpel-Schlüter Dr. L. Hüther Dr. S. Kersten Dr. J. Klüß Dr. M. Kölln N. Kröncke P. Mertens Dr. J. Saltzmann Dr. D. von Soosten Dr. C. Unruh Working Groups Working group Ruminant nutrition Working group Non-ruminant nutrition Working group Basic analytics Working group Immuno-Nutrition Working group Carry Over Working group Molecular Microbiology and Bioinformatics Data management and digitalization Experimental station Braunschweig Experimental facilities Institute of Animal Welfare and Animal Husbandry (ITT) Scientists Prof. Dr. L. Schrader Dr. I. Wilk Dr. T. Bartels Dr. S. Dippel Dr. K. Kauselmann Dr. J. Knöll Dr. E.T. Krause Dr. A. Patt Dr. A. Riek Dr. H. Schomburg Dr. A. Schubbert Departments Research field: Animal-friendly and sustainable husbandry systems Archives Research field Behavioural demands and disorders Archives Research about tail biting Research field Methods for assessing animal welfare Archives Research field animal welfare-friendly stunning and killing Archives Experimental Station Celle Institute of Diagnostic Virology (IVD) Scientists Prof. Dr. M. Beer PD Dr. S. Blome Dr. M. Eschbaumer PD Dr. C. Grund Prof. Dr. T. Harder, PhD Dr. D. Höper Dr. B. Hoffmann PD Dr. D. Hoffmann Dr. P. König Dr. F. Pfaff Dr. A. Pohlmann PD Dr. D. Rubbenstroth, PhD Dr. K. Schlottau PD Dr. K. Wernike Reference Laboratories NRL for Mpox (formerly monkeypox) NRL for AHS WOAH, FAO and NRL for AI NRL for ASF WOAH and NRL for BHV-1 NRL for Bornaviruses NRL for BTV WOAH and NRL for BVD/MD NRL for CAE NRL for EBL NRL for EHD NRL for EIA NRL for EVA FAO and NRL for CSF NRL for LSD NRL for FMD, SVD, VS NRL for MV WOAH, FAO and NRL for ND NRL for Sheep and Goat Pox NRL for PPR NRL for RP NRL for SARS-CoV-2 NRL for SBV Consiliary laboratory CL for RHD-Virus Laboratories / Working Groups Laboratory for Applied Bioinformatics and Sequencing of Viral Genomes and Transcriptomes Laboratory for Biocuration Laboratory for Molecular Virus Characterization Laboratory for NGS-based pathogen characterization and animal disease diagnostics Laboratory for phylogenetic analyses with emphasis on influenza viruses and borna viruses Projects Department of Experimental Animal Facilities and Biorisk Management (ATB) Scientists Prof. Dr. J. P. Teifke Dr. S. Reiche Dr. A. Breithaupt Dr. J. Heidrich Dr. S. Kohler Dipl. Biol. M. Lenk Dr. C. Schröder Dr. J. Sehl-Ewert Dipl. Biol. M. Streitz Dr. C. Wylezich Laboratories Laboratories for pathology Laboratory for Pathology I Laboratory for Pathology II Laboratory for Experimental Animal Husbandry and Bacteriology Laboratory for the Generation of Monoclonal Antibodies Bio Bank BSL4-Manager Projects Licensing Authority Career Vacancies Young Academics Graduate School Vocational Training Work and Family Services National Reference Laboratories List of Animal Diseases Legal Basis National Contact Point according to the EU regulations on Animal Welfare at the time of killing Bio Bank German Gene Bank Licensing Authority Libraries Information systems and databases EURL CSF / ASF Database GIS TRACES TSIS TSN Manuals of the LAV Working Group Animal Welfare Publications Overview OPEN AGRAR Radar Bulletin Germany Amtliche Methodensammlung Aktualisierungen Methodensammlung Richtlinie zur Desinfektion bei Tierseuchen Risk Assessments Information on animal diseases Informationen zu Tierschutz und Tierhaltung Annual Animal Health Reports The LabLoeffler The „Loeffler“ Special Publications Publication lists Press Press Office Press Releases Historical Exhibition Commissions Overview National Expert Group ‚Mosquitoes as Vectors of Disease Agents‘ Geschäftsstelle Veranstaltungen Mitglieder Standing Committee on Vaccination for Veterinary Medicine Deutsch Data Protection Barrierefreiheit Leichte Sprache Gebärdensprache Contact Site map The cookie window is suppressed by a browser extension. Please unblock the website. About Cookies This website uses cookies. Those have two functions: On the one hand they are providing basic functionality for this website. On the other hand they allow us to improve our content for you by saving and analyzing anonymized user data. You can redraw your consent to using these cookies at any time. Find more information regarding cookies on our Data Protection Declaration and regarding us on the Imprint. Settings Mandatory accept These cookies are needed for a smooth operation of our website. NamePurposeLifetimeTypeProvider Saves your consent to using cookies. 1 year HTML Assigns your browser to a session on the server. session HTTP Statistics accept With the help of these cookies we strive to improve our offer for our users. By means of anonymized data of website users we can optimize the user flow. This enables us to improve our website content. NamePurposeLifetimeTypeProvider Used to store a few details about the user such as the unique visitor ID. 13 months HTML Used to store the attribution information, the referrer initially used to visit the website. 6 months HTML Short lived cookie used to temporarily store data for the visit. 30 minutes HTML Short lived cookie used to temporarily store data for the visit. 30 minutes HTML Short lived cookie used to temporarily store data for the visit. 30 minutes HTML Deny all cookies Save Accept all cookiesHow canine respiratory outbreak is affecting Delaware animal sheltersSkip to main content HomeElection 2024NewsBusinessCrimeEducationDE PoliticsInvestigationsNational PoliticsUSA TODAY Canine respiratory outbreak affecting Delaware animal sheltersShannon Marvel McNaught Delaware News JournalShow Caption Hide Caption Pets in hot weather: How to protect dogs, cats in summerHere are some tips on going outside and traveling with pets in hot weather as summer begins to heat up.The Delaware Division of Public Health is asking the public to make every effort to reunite stray dogs with their owners as animal shelters and rescues struggle to find space amid a severe respiratory illness outbreak."The impact on local shelters from the outbreak is significant," a news release from the division said Tuesday.Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex, commonly known as kennel cough, began spreading among Delaware shelter and rescue dogs in June, "causing upper and lower respiratory signs and death," State Veterinarian Karen Lopez wrote in a control order issued Friday. Symptoms include lethargy, lack of appetite, fever, clear or green nasal and/or ocular discharge, cough, vomiting and difficulty breathing."We are not dealing with the uncomplicated version of CIRDC but the complicated, systemic version of this illness," Department of Agriculture spokesperson Stacey Hofmann said. ""Many of these animals are very sick, with some requiring veterinary emergency care."Over 55 dogs are sick and two have died, Hofmann said. The outbreak has so far spread among three Delaware animal shelters and one private rescue, while another shelter has treated affected outpatient dogs.The outbreak prompted Lopez to issue a control order Friday, prohibiting shelter and rescue dogs from coming into or going out of the state and requiring shelters and rescues to submit outbreak-related reports to the state. The order said the outbreak involves "multiple pathogens," including the bacteria mycoplasma cynos, and Hofmann later added adenovirus and canine influenza.Background: Kennel cough outbreak leads Delaware to prohibit dogs from being moved in or out of stateHow it's affecting sheltersAfter closing last week due to a "severe respiratory outbreak," a Humane Animal Partners Facebook post said Monday a "double strain of canine influenza" had been diagnosed at the nonprofit's Wilmington facility. Thirty dogs are being treated, the post said, with multiple dogs being cared for at Blue Pearl Animal Hospital.Dog intakes and adoptions are suspended at the Wilmington facility until further notice. None of the nonprofit's other locations are affected.Humane Animal Partners has ordered canine influenza vaccines, the post said. Delaware's contracted animal shelter, Brandywine Valley SPCA, began administering canine influenza vaccines to all their dogs Tuesday, spokesperson Sara Smith said."We also have reviewed and revamped all of our cleaning protocols to prevent the spread of any illness," Smith said, but she noted the rate and severity of respiratory illnesses at Brandywine isn't any higher than usual.More: Your guide to dogs at Delaware beaches, including rules, restrictions and remindersTwo other Delaware animal shelters have been affected by the outbreak. First State Animal Center and SPCA in Dover "closed to the public" Saturday, according to a Facebook post, "to protect your animals at home and protect our animals in the shelter."Faithful Friends in New Castle posted on Facebook July 7 that the organization is closed to dog adoptions and intakes due to a respiratory illness.How to help animal sheltersIf you find a stray dog, before contacting Delaware Animal Services or Brandywine Valley SPCA, the Division of Public Health asks citizens do the following:Walk around the neighborhood and check with people outside.Check with neighbors.Post the dog on the State Lost and Found Pet Registry. Post the dog on Facebook, Nextdoor and other social media.Otherwise, the best ways to help all animal shelters and rescues are to adopt, foster or donate. Humane Animal Partners has an Amazon wish list, as well."We are still open for adoptions. We have plenty of healthy animals that are still looking for homes and we really do need the community to come and consider adopting," Brandywine's Smith said.Shannon Marvel McNaught reports on southern Delaware and beyond. Reach her at smcnaught@gannett.com or on Twitter @MarvelMcNaught. Facebook Twitter EmailShare your feedback to help improve our site!HelpTerms of ServiceSubscription Terms & ConditionsPrivacy PolicySite MapAccessibilityOur Ethical PrinciplesResponsible DisclosureYour Privacy Choices © Copyright Gannett 2024Influenza viruses can use two ways to infect cells: Study, Health News, ET HealthWorld Login Get App News HospitalsFinanceDiagnosticsPeople MovementM&APharmaPolicySlideshowsResearchMedical DevicesIndustryView all News Exclusives Leaders Speak Events Awards Webinars Brand Solutions More Newsletters MasterClasses About Us Contact Us Advertise With Us Search Pharma Policy Medical Devices Diagnostics Industry Hospitals More Industry 2 min read Influenza viruses can use two ways to infect cells: Study The majority of type A influenza viruses found in birds and pigs do not pose a health concern to people. However, the viruses might represent a problem if there is an outbreak, such as the one presently occurring in dairy cattle in the United States, or during seasonal epidemics. In rare situations, a virus can spread from animals to people, potentially causing a worldwide pandemic. Telegram Facebook Copy Link ANI Updated On Jul 18, 2024 at 06:29 AM IST Read by: 100 Industry Professionals Read by 100 Industry Professionals Zurich: Most influenza viruses enter human or animal cells via specialised routes on their surfaces. Researchers at the University of Zurich have revealed that certain human and avian influenza viruses may infect cells via a second entrance mechanism, an immune system protein complex.This ability helps the viruses infect different species - and potentially jump between animals and humans.The majority of type A influenza viruses found in birds and pigs do not pose a health concern to people. However, the viruses might represent a problem if there is an outbreak, such as the one presently occurring in dairy cattle in the United States, or during seasonal epidemics. In rare situations, a virus can spread from animals to people, potentially causing a worldwide pandemic. Advt Most influenza viruses enter host cells by using their envelope proteins, which stand up from the surface like spikes. The so-called hemagglutinin binds to sialic acid, a chemical group on the surface of human cells and the cells of various animal species. An international research team led by Professor Silke Stertz from the Institute of Medical Virology at the University of Zurich (UZH) has now shown that flu viruses also have a second method to infect host cells. "Human influenza A viruses of subtype H2N2 and related H2N2 avian influenza viruses can enter cells through a second receptor. They use an alternative entry pathway," says Stertz.The researchers found that hemagglutinin also binds to MHC class II protein complexes. These complexes on the surface of certain immune and respiratory cells are responsible for differentiating between the body's own cells and foreign cells. "We found that MHC class II complexes in humans, pigs, ducks, swans and chickens allow viruses to enter cells, but not those in bats," says Stertz.This dual ability to infect cells was observed in lab-grown cell lines and human airway cultures. How well the viral receptor fits onto the cell surface structures plays a crucial part in determining which host species and tissues are infected and ultimately how severe the infection will be. Receptor specificity also influences whether a virus is able to infect different animal species or even humans (zoonosis). "Our finding shows that influenza viruses can adapt to use different entry pathways. This might influence their ability to infect different species and potentially jump between animals and humans," emphasizes the UZH virologist. Advt The risk that avian, swine and other animal influenza viruses could trigger a flu pandemic in humans may thus be greater than previously assumed. The ability to use MHC class II proteins for cell entry could have been one of the reasons why H2N2 influenza viruses emerged as a pandemic virus in Asia back in 1957. This is another good reason to step up global influenza surveillance in both animals and humans. ANI Published On Jul 18, 2024 at 06:26 AM IST Telegram Facebook Copy Link Be the first one to comment. Comment Now COMMENTS Comment Now Read Comment (1) All Comments By commenting, you agree to the Prohibited Content Policy Post By commenting, you agree to the Prohibited Content Policy Post Find this Comment Offensive? Choose your reason below and click on the submit button. This will alert our moderators to take actions REASONS FOR REPORTING Foul Language Defamatory Inciting hatred against a certain community Out of Context / Spam Others Report Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals Subscribe to our newsletter to get latest insights & analysis. Download ETHealthworld App Get Realtime updates Save your favourite articles Scan to download App influenza viruses Health News infect cells cell entry host cells viral receptor entry pathways MHC class II complexes pandemic virus global influenza surveillance News See whats happening in Health sector right now Exclusive Read and get insights from specially curated unique stories from editorial Leaders Speak Business leaders sharing their insights Events Explore and discuss challenges & trends in India's leading B2B events Awards Recognise work that not only stood out but was also purposeful Webinars Join leaders & experts for roundtables, conferences, panels and discussions Join the community of 2M+ industry professionals Subscribe to our Daily Newsletter By continuing you agree to our Privacy Policy & Terms & Conditions Advertise With Us We have various options to advertise with us including Events, Advertorials, Banners, Mailers, etc. Get in Touch Download ETHealthworld App Save your favourite articles with seamless reading experience Get updates on your preferred social platform Follow us for the latest news, insider access to events and more. About Us Contact Us Newsletters Guest-Post Guidelines RSS Feed Sitemap RSS Feed Sitemap Guest-Post Guidelines The Economic Times Business Verticals Auto Retail Telecom Energy CIO Real Estate Marketing & Advertising CFO IT Security BFSI Government Hospitality HR Legal ET TravelWorld Infra B2B CIOSEA HRSEA HREMEA Education EnergyWorldMEA Manufacturing Pharma @2024 ETHealthworld.com. All Right Reserved. Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Cookie Settings HomeNewsIndustryInfluenza viruses can use two ways to infect cells: StudyAustralia’s current avian influenza outbreak ‘unprecedented’ LOG IN SIGN UP SEARCH View More Results SEARCH LOG IN Space Tech Nature Earth History People Health Core Sciences Newsletters Subscribe Now Animals Australian Mammal of the Year Birds Evolution Marine life Plants Animals Australian Mammal of the Year Birds Evolution Marine life Plants Cosmos » Birds Experts say Australia’s current bird flu outbreak is ‘unprecedented’ Credit: Bloomberg Creative/Getty Images July 16, 2024 Imma Perfetto Cosmos science journalist By Imma Perfetto Australia is experiencing 3 different outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenzas. Dr Debbie Eagles, director of the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP) at CSIRO, describes this as “unprecedented.” “This year ACDP has conducted 3,000 tests on 1,000 samples since the first detection of H7N3 near Meredith in Victoria in May, and subsequently H7N9 Terang in Victoria, H7N8 in New South Wales and [Australian Capital Territory],” says Eagles. Presently, H7N3 has spread to 7 additional Victorian poultry farms, while H7N8 has spread to 2 commercial poultry farms in NSW, and 1 in the ACT. “Previously when we’ve had outbreaks in Australia that’s been a single strain, usually then affecting 1 region,” says Eagles. Prior to this year, there has only been 8 outbreaks of H7 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) in Australia since 1976. Avian influenza viruses are described according to the combination of 2 groups of surface proteins: haemagglutinin or “H” proteins (H1 to H16) and neuraminidase or “N” proteins (N1 to N9). Samples from each of the affected properties sent to ACDP for whole genome sequencing and bioinformatic analysis confirmed that the outbreaks are not linked. Read More Biology Explainer: what is going on with bird flu? Instead, the 3 strains are more closely related to H7 strains carried by local Australian wild bird populations, which Australia has a good baseline understanding of thanks to the National Avian Influenza Wild Bird (NAIWB) Surveillance Program. Usually, these circulate in wild waterfowl, such as ducks and geese, as low pathogenic avian influenzas (LPAI), which do not cause signs of disease. However, when H5 and H7 strains get into commercial poultry farms, they have the potential to mutate and become highly pathogenic – causing devastating disease and death in chickens. “This is basically due to a mutation of a single virus gene … and we’re not saying that these mutations don’t occur in wild birds as well, but the impact is much more significant in commercial chicken farms because of the nature of how birds are housed,” says ACDP senior research scientist and World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) expert for avian influenza, Dr Frank Wong. Wong says that in commercial chicken farms a lot more birds are located in close contact. “And chickens actually are naive host population for avian influenza viruses, so they’re more susceptible to infection … because often they don’t have inbuilt immunity. So, once a virus turns highly pathogenic, the “attack rate” is very rapid, it burns through the population,” he says. Why 3 separate strains have made the jump to poultry in just the past few months remains unknown. “There could be many reasons we don’t really know because … viruses [are] being carried in wild birds [and it] is very difficult to have a continuous picture of what’s going on before they get into commercial chicken farms,” says Wong. “So it could be many things, the wild bird dynamics at a particular point of time, climate, changes in weather patterns, or just coincidence.” So, while any new spillover events cannot be predicted before they occur, state authorities in VIC, NSW, and ACT are controlling the movements in already affected areas to minimise and prevent the risk of further spread of existing outbreaks. Eagles says: “Each of the infected properties has been dealt with by local authorities in terms of the necessary disposal and subsequent ongoing decontamination of those facilities. That is consistent with a response plan that all states and industry agreed to in advance. So, it’s a very well-developed response plan that Australia has.” Debbie Eagles. Credit: CSIRO And, while Australia currently doesn’t vaccinate poultry against avian influenza, she says there are ongoing discussions around whether it might be used for certain high-risk species and for people in preparation for the HPAI H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b H5N1. Viral strains in this clade are circulating internationally causing severe disease in poultry, and species of wild birds and mammals including cattle (in the US) and marine mammals. It has reached every other continent through the movements of migratory waterfowl that do not come to Australia. “Indonesia and countries like the Philippines within our region already have this virus … it’s been circulating in those countries, our near neighbours, for a couple of years,” says Wong. “The risk there is more in our regional nomadic duck species … what we call the bridging species, that might be affected and then kind of hop from island to island.” In response to the threat posed by a potential incursion of H5N1, last week the government announced $1.1 million of ongoing funding to extend the NAIWB Surveillance Program for 4 years. The risk-based surveillance program focuses on sampling wild birds at locations near both human populations and commercial poultry farms. But, according to Wong, there are plans to expand and increase the efficiency of this surveillance in northern Australia. “That’s where we think would be the higher risk for an incursion of exotic strains of HPAI viruses,” says Wong. “But again, the northern part of Australia ironically poses the most challenge in terms of logistics and coverage because they’re remote sites with very low population and a lot of distance to cover.” Originally published by Cosmos as Experts say Australia’s current bird flu outbreak is ‘unprecedented’ You Might Like Birds $95 million injection to fight the threat of avian influenza Birds How avian influenza has spread to Antarctic islands Birds How does bird flu cross species barrier to infect mammals? Birds You might have missed: blowflies carry bird flu; twisted carbon nanotubes; and more Loading next article... Please login to favourite this article. Close Login Subscribe Now About Us FAQ Terms of use Schools Contact us Privacy Policy 'Cosmos' and 'The Science of Everything' are registered trademarks in Australia and owned by CSIRO. T: 1300 719623 (Australia) E: [email protected] Address: Cosmos, CSIRO Publishing, PO Box 10041, Adelaide SA 5001 AustraliaNew outbreak of HPAI in Colorado leads to massive hen culling Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Spain Indonesia Search Register Login Search TECHNICAL ARTICLES MONOGRAPHICS Species REPORTAGE INTERVIEWS SECTORIAL NEWS Authors BUSINESS DIRECTORY PRODUCT GUIDES REGISTRATION/LOGIN AVINEWS MAGAZINE PRINTED SUBSCRIPTION AGRIFM - PODCAST AGRI - CALENDAR AGRINEWS CAMPUS REGIONS Spain Mexico Brazil Arabic Global South Cone Andean Region Indonesia Magazine Feeding and nutrition of layers Themes Species Interviews Sectorial Authors Companies Product Events RECOMMENDED Alternative production Animal Nutrition AviNews aviNews Biosecurity Equipment Events Genetics 2024 PSA Annual Meeting 41st Saudi Agriculture 2024 Additives aditives alpacas Alphitobius diaperinus Amino acids aMPV Animal welfare Antibiotic-free poultry Artificial Intelligence Ascaridia galli READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER OTHER EDITIONS 17 Jul 2024 New outbreak of HPAI in Colorado leads to massive hen culling In July 2024, Colorado faced a significant outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in a commercial poultry production unit located in Weld County. PDF FILE In July 2024, Colorado faced a significant outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) in a commercial poultry production unit located in Weld County. The severity of the situation prompted authorities to take drastic measures, resulting in the sacrifice of approximately 1.8 million laying hens. This article explores the details of the outbreak, its impact, and the ongoing efforts to contain the virus. The outbreak The Colorado Department of Agriculture confirmed the presence of HPAI subtype H5N1 in the affected poultry facility. As a result, the following actions were taken: Mass culling: Nearly 1.8 million laying hens were culled to prevent further spread of the virus. This mass culling represents the second-largest such event in the state’s history, surpassed only by a similar outbreak in June 2022. Disaster declaration: Authorities issued a disaster declaration, allowing for the allocation of necessary resources to combat the outbreak. This declaration ensures that affected facilities receive support and containment tools. Local quarantine: Veterinary services implemented quarantine orders in various parts of the affected region. These measures restrict the movement of birds both within and outside the area, aiming to limit the virus’s spread. Colorado’s battle against HPAI Colorado has been grappling with avian influenza outbreaks since 2022. Here are some key points: Commercial incidences: Over the past two years, Colorado has reported ten incidents of avian influenza in commercial poultry operations and 27 in backyard flocks. These outbreaks have affected more than 8.1 million birds. National impact: Nationally, the United States has culled 1.8 million avian specimens involved in H5N1 outbreaks in July alone, significantly surpassing the 550,000 birds recorded the previous month. Cumulative toll: Since the start of the epidemic in February 2022, the U.S. poultry industry has sacrificed a staggering 99.1 million commercial and backyard birds across 48 states. Ongoing efforts Efforts to contain the outbreak continue:Continue after advertising. Biosecurity measures: Poultry farms across Colorado are implementing strict biosecurity protocols to prevent further spread. These include disinfection procedures, restricted access, and enhanced surveillance. Vaccination campaigns: Authorities are considering vaccination programs for poultry populations. However, challenges remain due to the rapid mutation rate of avian influenza viruses. Economic impact: The outbreak has significant economic implications, affecting both poultry producers and consumers. Egg prices have risen, and farmers are facing financial losses. Conclusion The recent outbreak in Colorado underscores the ongoing threat posed by avian influenza. Vigilance, swift action, and collaboration among authorities, farmers, and veterinarians remain crucial in containing and managing such outbreaks. As the poultry industry grapples with these challenges, efforts continue to safeguard both bird health and food security. Sources: Available upon request PDF FILE Related to Biosecurity 04 Nov Backyard pig infected with H5N1 virus in the U.S. 30 Oct France is scared by Salmonella and recalls 3 million eggs 10 Sep AI H5N1 in the U.S.: 13 human cases in poultry workers since April 04 Sep Biosecurity Compliance: The Balance Between Culture, Personality, Experience, Education and Technology 30 Aug SENASICA successfully eradicates H5N1 AI outbreak in Mexico MAGAZINE AVINEWS INTERNATIONAL Subscribe now to the poultry technical magazine OTHER EDITIONS READ SUMMARY SUBSCRIBE RECEIVE IN PAPER AUTHORS Zoetis Technical Team FOLLOW H&N Technical Team FOLLOW Brian Fairchild FOLLOW Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon FOLLOW Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan FOLLOW Guillermo Tellez FOLLOW Ken Bafundo FOLLOW Güner GÖVENÇ FOLLOW Nestor Ledesma Martínez FOLLOW Dra. Elein Hernández FOLLOW Talha Siddique FOLLOW EDITION AviNews International September 2024 In ovo vaccination with Embrex® technology helps support earlier, more robust immune response in chicks Zoetis Technical Team Egg Size H&N Technical Team Brian Fairchild Interview Brian Fairchild High Oleic Soybeans and their Impact on Egg and Poultry Meat Quality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Metapneumovirus Epidemiology and Seasonality Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon Controlling Insects in Poultry Production Gracieli Araujo Specialist in Animal Welfare - Cobb LatCan Effects of Chronic Stress and Intestinal Inflammation on Commercial Poultry Health and Performance: Part I Guillermo Tellez Applications of Saponins in Poultry Production Ken Bafundo The Quality Parameters of Soybean and Alternative Protein Feedstuffs in Poultry Nutrition Güner GÖVENÇ Pathology of the Immune System in the Diagnosis of Immunosuppression in Poultry Nestor Ledesma Martínez Animal Welfare and Artificial Intelligence: A Combination of the Poultry Present or Future? Dra. Elein Hernández Advancing Poultry Health: The Role of Predictive Analytics in Disease Prevention Talha Siddique Biosecurity Compliance: The Balance Between Culture, Personality, Experience, Education and Technology Dr. Edgar O. Oviedo-Rondon SUMMARY Subscribe now to aviNews magazine SEE MORE OTHER EDITIONS JOIN OUR POULTRY COMMUNITY Access the PDF articles Keep up to date with our newsletters Receive the magazine for free in digital version REGISTER DISCOVER LEGAL Privacy policy Cookies policy Más información sobre las cookies OUR MEDIA aviNews Magazine Other Media JOIN Online Register Printed subscriptions Advertise Publish with us Contact FOLLOW US 2024 Copyright Grupo de Comunicación agriNews, SL. All rights reserved. Reproduction of the content of this page in any format or communication, electronic or printed, without express authorization is prohibited.Request authorization. Agencia de Marketing GanaderoWhat's the Link Between the Flu and Asthma? HealthlineHealth ConditionsFeaturedAllBreast CancerIBD MigraineMultiple Sclerosis (MS)Rheumatoid ArthritisType 2 DiabetesSponsored TopicsArticlesAllAcid RefluxADHDAllergiesAlzheimer's & DementiaBipolar DisorderCancerCrohn's DiseaseChronic PainCold & FluCOPDDepressionFibromyalgiaHeart DiseaseHigh CholesterolHIVHypertensionIPFOsteoarthritisPsoriasisSkin Disorders and CareSTDsDiscoverWellness TopicsAllNutritionFitnessSkin CareSexual HealthWomen's HealthMental Well-BeingSleepProduct ReviewsAllVitamins & SupplementsSleepMental HealthNutritionAt-Home TestingCBDMen’s HealthOriginal SeriesAllFresh Food FastFood hacks to make eating healthier, easier.Diagnosis DiariesReal diagnosis stories from people who get it.You’re Not AloneStories from real people that destigmatize mental health conditions.Present TenseReal-world mindfulness for busy people.Video SeriesAllYouth in FocusMental health challenges facing our youth.Healthy HarvestMeet your food, from farm to table.Through An Artist's EyeA breast cancer story told through art.Future of HealthInnovations shaping the future of health.PlanHealth ChallengesMindful EatingSugar SavvyMove Your BodyGut HealthMood FoodsAlign Your SpineFind CareAllPrimary CareMental HealthOB-GYNDermatologistsNeurologistsCardiologistsOrthopedistsLifestyle QuizzesWeight ManagementAm I Depressed? A Quiz for TeensAre You a Workaholic?How Well Do You Sleep?Tools & ResourcesHealth NewsFind a DietFind Healthy SnacksDrugs A-ZHealth A-ZConnectFind Your Bezzy CommunityBezzy communities provide meaningful connections with others living with chronic conditions. Join Bezzy on the web or mobile app.AllBreast CancerInflammatory Bowel DiseaseCOPDMigraineMultiple SclerosisPsoriasisFollow us on social mediaCan't get enough? Connect with us for all things health.SubscribeNutritionMeal KitsOverviewDietsMeal KitsPrepared MealsComparisonsGrocery DeliverySpecial DietsHealthy EatingFood FreedomConditionsFeel Good FoodProductsVitamins & SupplementsSustainabilityWeight ManagementIs It Dangerous to Get the Flu If You Have Asthma?Medically reviewed by Nick Villalobos, MD — Written by Rosalie Rung on July 15, 2024Flu severityCausationFlu frequency in asthmaCough medicationsAsthma medications TakeawayPeople with asthma have a higher risk of complications if they get the flu. The flu virus can cause asthma flares and could lead to pneumonia. Getting the flu vaccine is the best way to prevent getting the flu for people with asthma.Asthma is a chronic respiratory condition that causes inflammation in your airways. It can make breathing difficult and often has several triggers. The flu is a viral respiratory tract infection that can also affect your airways and may lead to other complications.Although there’s no official connection between the flu and asthma, getting the flu can be more complicated for someone with asthma.Is the flu worse if you have asthma?Yes, the flu can be more serious if you have asthma. You’re more likely to develop pneumonia, which is a serious flu complication.Both asthma and the flu affect the respiratory system. Asthma can cause narrowing and inflammation in the airways, making breathing difficult. Viral respiratory tract infections, such as the flu, can worsen asthma symptoms and may trigger an asthma episode.The best way to prevent complications from the flu if you have asthma is to make sure you get the flu vaccine. One study suggests that people with asthma who got the flu vaccine had fewer asthma attacks, had fewer healthcare visits, and needed fewer asthma medications.Can the flu cause asthma? No. The flu can’t cause asthma, and asthma can’t cause the flu. Asthma is a chronic condition without a definitive cause. The flu is a viral infection that may affect the airways and make asthma symptoms worse.That said, having frequent viral infections as a child is a general risk factor for developing or worsening asthma.When to go to the hospital Some symptoms of the flu and asthma need emergency care. You should take a child to the hospital immediately if you see:cyanosis, or a blue appearance of the tongue or lipsrapid breathing or difficulty breathingunresponsiveness or extreme lethargyincreased fever or coughfever with a rashconstant vomitingcontinued irritabilityFor adults, the symptoms are a bit different. Emergency asthma symptoms for adults include:pain in the chest or abdomendifficulty breathing or rapid breathingsudden dizzinessconfusionunresponsiveness or extreme lethargypersistent vomitingDo people with asthma get the flu more often? No. People with asthma are no more likely to get the flu than anyone else. However, if you have asthma and get the flu, you’re more likely to develop complications from the flu. To reduce your risk of complications, it’s important to contact your doctor if you have asthma and develop any flu symptoms, such as:coughfeversore throatbody achesheadachechillscongestionfatiguevomiting or diarrhea (usually in children)Can people with asthma take cough medications? There are different forms of asthma that have different triggers and symptoms. In general, most cough medications won’t help with asthma and could actually make your symptoms worse.This is true for people with cough variant asthma, which only presents as a chronic cough. It’s also true for people with asthmatic bronchitis. Because coughing is your body’s way of trying to clear something that’s irritating your lungs, taking a medication that acts as a cough suppressant won’t help. However, medications that act as cough expectorants could help you bring up more mucus and reduce chest congestion. Guaifenesin, a common ingredient in many over-the-counter cough expectorants, is present in products such as Mucinex, Robitussin Cough, and Chest Congestion DM.In most asthma situations, the best cough relief will come from taking your prescription medications, avoiding your asthma triggers, and trying at-home remedies for decongestion. Talk with your doctor to get the best recommendation for your symptoms. Does an inhaler or nebulizer help with flu symptoms? Using your asthma inhaler or nebulizer may help reduce your flu symptoms. Nebulizers turn liquid medications into a mist that you can inhale through a mask or mouthpiece into your airways and lungs. You can use different kinds of medications in nebulizers and help reduce the inflammation in your airways.An asthma inhaler can also help open your airways and reduce flu symptoms. Inhalers are portable and can also offer a quick dose of medication.You can try these medications to see if they relieve your symptoms, but if they don’t improve, talk with your doctor. TakeawayAsthma is a chronic inflammatory condition that affects your airways. Getting the flu can be dangerous for someone with asthma, as they’re more likely to have serious complications. The flu virus can also cause difficulty breathing and respiratory issues, which can lead to pneumonia. The best ways to avoid getting the flu if you have asthma are to get a flu vaccine every year and to stay on top of your asthma management plan.How we reviewed this article:SourcesHistoryHealthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.Albrecht HH, et al. (2017). Role of guaifenesin in the management of chronic bronchitis and upper respiratory tract infections. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5724298/Asthma causes & risk factors. (2024).https://www.lung.org/lung-health-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/asthma/learn-about-asthma/what-causes-asthmaAsthma: Causes and triggers. (2024).https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/asthma/causesAsthma cough. (n.d.).https://acaai.org/asthma/symptoms/asthma-cough/Asthma: Learn more – Medication for people with asthma. (2022).https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279519/Boktor SW, et al. (2023). Influenza. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459363/Flu & people with asthma. (2024). https://www.cdc.gov/flu/highrisk/asthma.htmFlu (influenza). (2023).https://aafa.org/asthma/asthma-triggers-causesespiratory-infections-flu-cold-asthma/flu-influenza/Nicholas B, et al. (2017). Susceptibility to influenza virus infection of bronchial biopsies in asthma. https://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(17)30151-3/fulltextVasileiou E, et al. (2017). Effectiveness of influenza vaccines in asthma: A systematic review and meta-analysis.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5850022/Who needs a flu vaccine. (2024).https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/vaccinations.htmShare this articleMedically reviewed by Nick Villalobos, MD — Written by Rosalie Rung on July 15, 2024Read this nextAsthma Risk FactorsFind out all you need to know about what causes asthma, including genetic and environmental factors and common triggers.READ MOREHow to Prevent Asthma AttacksMedically reviewed by Madeline Knott, MD Many factors play a role in triggering asthma attacks. Learn what they are and how to prevent asthma attacks.READ MORECan a Thunderstorm Cause an Asthma Attack?While it may seem far-fetched, thunderstorms can trigger asthma attacks in some situations. Keep reading to learn how, prevention tips, and more.READ MOREAre Beta-Blockers Safe with Asthma?While beta-blockers can be lifesaving for those with heart conditions, those with asthma may find they make breathing more difficult. Keep reading to…READ MOREDisability Benefits and AsthmaIf your asthma symptoms are severe enough to keep you from working, you may quality for disability benefits. Keep reading to learn more.READ MOREWhat Are the Side Effects of Albuterol in Toddlers?Medically reviewed by Karen Gill, M.D.Most common side effects of albuterol in toddlers include tremors and nervousness. Your child's doctor can prescribe other medications if side effects…READ MOREHow Is Asthma Diagnosed?If you are experiencing asthma-like symptoms, a doctor is likely to run a variety of tests to determine the cause. Keep reading to learn why and what…READ MOREYour Guide to Asthma Attack First AidMedically reviewed by Adithya Cattamanchi, M.D.Asthma attacks can be frightening, but the right steps can help prevent emergencies. Keep reading to learn how:READ MORECan an Asthma Attack be Helped by Hot Showers?Asthma attacks are unlikely to improve with hot showers, but they may help asthma symptoms. Asthma triggers vary, so they won't be good for everyone.READ MOREMedicare Supplement Plan L: 2025 Cost and CoverageMedicare Supplement Plan L is a Medigap plan that has a yearly out-of-pocket limit. Learn about its benefits, coverage, and cost for the 2025 calendar…READ MOREAbout UsContact UsPrivacy PolicyPrivacy SettingsAdvertising PolicyHealth TopicsSitemapMedical AffairsContent IntegrityNewsletters© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.© 2024 Healthline Media LLC. All rights reserved. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.AboutCareersAdvertise with usOUR BRANDSHealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych CentralBezzyExpert Commentary: What’s going on with bird flu in Australia? - CSIRO Blog icon Skip to content Skip to search AUSTRALIA’S NATIONAL SCIENCE AGENCY About Research Work with us Careers Education News Events Search Quick links Climate change COVID-19 research Diets Staff profiles Home ... News All news and articles Expert Commentary: What’s going on with bird flu in Australia? In the wake of three separate strains being detected in Australia, and as another 'highly pathogenic' strain spreads around the world, Dr Frank Wong explains what we need to know about bird flu. Contact Share 19 July 2024 Expert commentary The world is currently experiencing a bird flu ‘panzootic’ – a pandemic of birds. This devastating global outbreak is being caused by a particular strain of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus called H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b. It is affecting wild birds and poultry, and some mammals, on every continent except Australia. Meanwhile, three separate strains of bird flu – H7N3, H7N9 and H7N8 – have been detected across poultry farms in Australia. As Australia’s national reference laboratory, CSIRO’s Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP) is playing a key role in testing, determining virus strains and keeping Australian authorities informed. All quotes below are available for use by media. They can be attributed to Dr Frank Wong, a senior research scientist at ACDP and a World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) Reference Laboratory expert in avian influenza. CSIRO’s Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP) in Geelong, Victoria. What’s the difference between low pathogenic and highly pathogenic bird flu? “The virus strains are classified as either low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) or high pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) viruses. LPAI infections in birds may cause only mild illness or no disease at all. But HPAI infections in poultry can cause outbreaks of severe disease, resulting in many sick and dead birds in affected farms. “Some H7 and H5 strains start out as low pathogenic in wild birds but they can become highly pathogenic through virus mutation in infected chicken flocks." How much of a risk does highly pathogenic avian influenza virus pose to people? Dr Frank Wong. “Bird flu is basically a virus that affects birds with occasional spill over to other animal species. “There have been rare cases when people have caught the virus, usually from working directly with the infected poultry or affected farms. “As it is still a bird-adapted virus, we normally do not see avian influenza being transmitted from person to person or mammal to mammal. The risk to people is still considered low at this time.” Has Australia ever had an outbreak of bird flu before now? “Australia has had previous outbreaks of the disease ‘HPAI’ in poultry, including in 2012, 2013 and again in 2020. In each instance, the outbreaks were quickly contained and the strain causing the highly pathogenic outbreak was eradicated. “Australia’s previous outbreaks were of H7 bird flu; we’ve never had an outbreak of H5N1 here, which is the strain causing havoc overseas.” What strain of bird flu is causing Australia’s current outbreaks? "There are currently two states and one territory affected by bird flu outbreaks. While there are three separate strains involved, they are all H7 strains of the virus. Outbreaks in Victoria have been caused by H7N3 HPAI impacting egg farms in the Meredith region and H7N9 HPAI in one farm in the Terang region. "The HPAI outbreaks affecting farmed chickens in the Hawkesbury region of NSW and in the ACT have been caused by the H7N8 strain." What strain of bird flu is causing the devastating outbreaks around the world? “The bird flu strain causing havoc overseas is known as highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b. It emerged sometime in 2020 and has spread to every continent except Australia, affecting millions of wild birds and domestic poultry. This virus has even killed wild birds and marine mammals in Antarctica.” What is different about this H5N1 strain? Wild birds can spread bird flu to farmed poultry, where it can mutate to more pathogenic strains. © CSKK IMG-6270, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 “Clade 2.3.4.4b H5N1 has picked up the ability to infect a much wider variety of bird species than other HPAI strains previously. “Scientists have also noted that wherever H5N1 spreads, it has mixed with local bird flu strains. This seems to have allowed it to adapt to new environments and may explain its ability to infect many new bird species. “It has also spilled over into several mammal species such as foxes, and marine mammals such as sea lions and elephant seals and on rare occasions it has spilled over into cats and dogs. It was reported in farmed minks and fur farms in Europe and since March this year, the virus was detected in dairy cows for the first time in the USA.” What is the risk that H5N1 will reach Australia? “The main hosts that carry bird flu viruses over long distances are migratory ducks and geese . As Australia isn’t in the flyways of these migrations, the risk of H5N1 reaching Australia is relatively low. “However, the risk has slightly increased because of H5N1’s ability to infect additional species of wild birds. This increases the chance of introduction through regional or bridging species.” What is CSIRO’s Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness in Geelong doing to prepare for a possible incursion of H5N1? “At CSIRO’s Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, we assist with Australia’s surveillance efforts and conduct research to characterise the virus to understand it better. We’re helping keep track of bird flu and which strains are spreading through poultry and wild birds not only in Australia but in our region and globally. “Australian state and territory laboratories rely on ACDP to conduct testing on bird samples to confirm the presence of avian influenza. “We then do genetic sequencing of the virus and use this information to identify the exact strain and understand if and how it is changing. This way we know if the virus is a local virus already present within Australian wild birds, or whether it could be a strain introduced from overseas. “We then provide this information and advice to authorities and animal health working groups to support them in making decisions for responding to outbreaks. “In my role as the World Organisation for Animal Health reference expert, I meet with the other avian influenza reference laboratory experts. We share information about the circulating strains around the world and any new spillover events, such as the H5N1 infections of dairy cattle in the US earlier this year. “This work has also helped us be as ready as we can be with diagnostic capabilities and response advice.” For more information on the current disease situation visit outbreak.gov.au. This site has links to state and territory specific information, and information about how to protect your birds. Read more about ACDP’s research on bird flu dynamics in Australia. Contact Us To Learn More Ms Bianca Frew +61 8 8303 8809 +61 4 7685 8973 Contact Ms Bianca Frew Media releases and statements Expert commentary 16 September 2024 7 min read Expert commentary: National Hydrogen Strategy Expert commentary 13 May 2024 6 min read What caused so many auroras, and could we see more? Expert commentary 25 April 2024 2 min read Expert commentary: Flowering plant tree of life revealed Expert commentary 23 February 2024 4 min read Expert commentary: CSIRO supports Intuitive Machines' first Moon mission Expert commentary 15 January 2024 7 min read Expert Commentary: 2023 was the warmest year on record Categories Health Agriculture Environment Contact Us To Learn More Ms Bianca Frew +61 8 8303 8809 +61 4 7685 8973 Contact Ms Bianca Frew Media releases and statements Expert commentary 16 September 2024 7 min read Expert commentary: National Hydrogen Strategy Expert commentary 13 May 2024 6 min read What caused so many auroras, and could we see more? Expert commentary 25 April 2024 2 min read Expert commentary: Flowering plant tree of life revealed Expert commentary 23 February 2024 4 min read Expert commentary: CSIRO supports Intuitive Machines' first Moon mission Expert commentary 15 January 2024 7 min read Expert Commentary: 2023 was the warmest year on record Categories Health Agriculture Environment At CSIRO, we solve the greatest challenges through innovative science and technology. Access to information Accessibility Copyright Legal notice and disclaimer Policy & Guidelines Your privacy We are committed to child safety and to the implementation of Child Safe principles and procedures. Contact us 1300 363 400 Subscribe to our newsletter Enter your email address Please leave this field empty or your enquiry will not be submitted: You shouldn't be able to see this field. Please try again and leave the field blank. Subscribe Thanks. You're all set to get our newsletter We could not sign you up to receive our newsletter. Please try again later or contact us if this persists. CSIRO acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the land, sea and waters, of the area that we live and work on across Australia. We acknowledge their continuing connection to their culture and pay our respects to their Elders past and present. View our vision towards reconciliation. Show Info Contact us Find out how we can help you and your business. Get in touch using the form below and our experts will get in contact soon! CSIRO will handle your personal information in accordance with the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) and our Privacy Policy. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Email * Enter a valid email address, for example jane.doe@csiro.au Country * A Country value must be provided First name * First name must be filled in Surname * Surname must be filled in I am representing * Myself Organisation (let us know in your enquiry if you are a small to medium enterprise) Please choose an option Organisation (let us know in your enquiry if you are a small to medium enterprise) * Organisation must be filled in Enquiry Subject * Please provide a subject for the enquriy 0 / 100 Your enquiry * We'll need to know what you want to contact us about so we can give you an answer 0 / 1900 I’d like to hear more by subscribing to CSIRO's monthly newsletter, Snapshot. Send enquiry Please leave this field empty or your enquiry will not be submitted: You shouldn't be able to see this field. Please try again and leave the field blank. Thank you We have received your enquiry and will reply soon. We're Sorry The contact form is currently unavailable. Please try again later. If this problem persists, please call us with your enquiry on 1300 363 400 or +61 3 9545 2176. We are available from 9.00 am to 4.00 pm AEST Monday - Friday.Five poultry workers diagnosed with bird flu in Colorado - UPI.com Top News U.S. News World News Featured Odd News Entertainment Movies Music TV Science Health Sports NFL MLB NBA Soccer Voices Photos News US News World News Entertainment Sports Archive Almanac Trending Ukraine's military SS United States 'Wicked' doll Ashanti, Ciara 'Border czar' Famous birthdays 'Gladiator II' Arizona AG Cardiovascular disease Advertisement Health News July 15, 2024 / 1:45 PM Five poultry workers diagnosed with bird flu in Colorado By Robin Foster, HealthDay News The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment reported five human cases of avian influenza in workers. Photo by Adobe Stock/HealthDay News Five poultry workers in Colorado have been diagnosed with bird flu, state health officials reported Sunday. "In coordination with the Colorado Department of Agriculture, the State Emergency Operations Center and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment [CDPHE] is now reporting a total of five human cases of avian influenza in workers responding to the avian flu outbreak at a commercial egg layer operation," the CDPHE said in a news release announcing the cases. Advertisement "CDC has confirmed four of the cases, and one additional case is presumptive positive and pending confirmation at CDC," the CDPHE added. Initially, three cases were confirmed by the CDC on Friday, and then a fourth case was confirmed late Friday evening. A fifth worker tested presumptive positive on Saturday and that sample has been sent to the CDC for confirmatory testing, Colorado officials said. No additional test results are pending. Related Colorado dairy farm worker infected with bird flu Few Americans understand dangers of raw milk Bird flu virus on cow milking equipment poses infection risk All of the illnesses were relatively mild -- red, irritated eyes, fever, chills, coughing, sore throat and runny nose. None of the patients have been hospitalized, Colorado officials said. The other U.S. cases of bird flu, reported in workers exposed to dairy cows, have also been mild. Advertisement The Colorado workers were exposed while culling poultry at a farm in the northeast part of the state, and all had direct contact with infected birds, officials said. The CDC has sent a nine-person team to Colorado to help in the investigation, at the state's request, agency officials said in a news release issued Friday. While the risk to the public remains low, "as we learn more, we will continue to assess the situation and provide updates," the CDC added. "These preliminary results again underscore the risk of exposure to infected animals. There are no signs of unexpected increases in flu activity otherwise in Colorado, or in other states affected by H5[N1] bird flu outbreaks in cows and poultry." Since 2020, a bird flu virus has been spreading among mammals -- including even alpacas. Earlier this year the virus, known as H5N1, was detected in U.S. dairy cows, and it is now circulating in livestock in multiple states. The cases reported earlier this year were among dairy farm workers in Michigan, Texas and Colorado. As of Friday, the H5N1 virus has been confirmed in 152 dairy herds in 12 states. More information The CDC has more on the bird flu outbreak. Advertisement Copyright © 2024 HealthDay. All rights reserved. Topics Animals Latest Headlines Health News // 7 hours ago Diabetes, kidney woes can lead to heart disease after decades People with both type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease face a heart health double-whammy, a new study says. Health News // 9 hours ago Asthma associated with memory problems in children, study finds Asthma is associated with memory problems in children, a new study has found. Health News // 20 hours ago Study: Deaths from cardiovascular disease surge among adults 25-64 in rural areas NEW YORK, Nov. 11 (UPI) -- Deaths from cardiovascular disease have surged among adults ages 25 to 64 living in rural areas, a new study shows. Health News // 10 hours ago Weight-loss drugs can help stroke survivors prevent recurrence The weight-loss drug Ozempic can help reduce stroke patients' risk of a heart attack or death, a new study says. Health News // 12 hours ago Triple-digit heat waves could pose danger to implanted defibrillators New research finds that on extremely hot days, people with implanted defibrillators face nearly triple the odds for a dangerous arrhythmia known as atrial fibrillation, compared to days with cooler temperatures. Health News // 12 hours ago If 911 operator gives instructions, bystanders more readily perform CPR In a study involving nearly 2,400 emergency calls for cardiac arrest in North Carolina, rates for bystander CPR rose dramatically when the 911 operator helped guide the caller. Health News // 13 hours ago Heart deaths related to obesity almost triple in U.S. over last two decades Lives lost to obesity-related heart disease have nearly tripled over the past twenty years, a new study reports. Health News // 3 days ago Study: Women might incur 'catastrophic' bills for out-of-state abortions One piece left out of the abortion debate is the high transportation and medical bills facing women forced to leave their state to obtain the procedure. Health News // 3 days ago 1 in 5 Americans might have Long COVID More than 1 in 5 Americans likely suffer from long COVID, a new AI-assisted review has found. Health News // 3 days ago Prostate cancer patients may have long-term complications from treatment Men who undergo prostate cancer treatment face a greatly increased risk of life-altering, long-term complications, a new study finds. Advertisement Trending Stories Study: Deaths from cardiovascular disease surge among adults 25-64 in rural areas 1 in 5 Americans might have Long COVID Heart deaths related to obesity almost triple in U.S. over last two decades Triple-digit heat waves could pose danger to implanted defibrillators Weight-loss drugs can help stroke survivors prevent recurrence Advertisement Follow Us Advertisement Back to top About UPI Contact Corrections Advertisements Copyright © 2024 United Press International, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyInfluenza A Virus: A Highly Contagious Viral Infection Influenza A Virus: A Highly Contagious Viral Infection Dr Divya Gopal, Internal Medicine at Sir HN Reliance Hospital and Research Centre, provided valuable insights on symptoms, affected patients, and preventive measures. 17 Jul, 2024 Tavishi Dogra Influenza A Cases With the onset of the monsoon, cases of Influenza A have surged in the city. Source: Thehealthsite Usually It is a self-limiting disease where patients are symptomatic for 3-4 days and improve with pyretics like paracetamol, antiviral medications and supportive therapy. Source: Thehealthsite Influenza A Patients Patients with lowered immunity suffering from diabetes, heart disease, kidney disease, and asthma are very prone to developing pneumonia, which might need hospitalisation and close monitoring. Source: Thehealthsite Influenza A Complications Complications are usually seen in small children and the elderly population. Source: Thehealthsite Regular hand washing Keeping surroundings clean and eating an excellent nutritious diet are essential to prevent the infection. Source: Thehealthsite Influenza immunization Yearly influenza immunization is essential, especially for people who have lower immunity. Source: Thehealthsite Early diagnosis and treatment is essential If you have symptoms, please meet your physician so that you can be monitored and treated for complications. Source: Thehealthsite Thanks For Reading! Next: Hyperthermia: 9 Foods To Prevent Excessive Body Heating Find Out MoreEmergency aid available for HPAI-related milk losses | American Veterinary Medical Association Skip to main content Header Menu Join/Renew Insurance Store Careers Search jobs Post a job Veterinary Career Center Work at AVMA Sign In Membership Membership Column 1 AVMA membershipInformation about AVMA membership—including benefits, value, and annual fees Renew your membershipCurrent AVMA members renewing annual membership Join AVMANew members joining for the first time Membership FAQsCommon questions about dues, insurance, group pay, and more New member resource centerA quick guide to resources and benefits for new AVMA members Sign in Directories Member directory Volunteer leaders AVMA staff leaders Get Involved Volunteer opportunities AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Donate to American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) Communities AVMA on social media Student AVMA (SAVMA) Allied groups International VMAs Advocacy Advocacy - Column 1 Advocacy International affairs Take Action Stay informed AVMA Congressional Advocacy Network (CAN) AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Get involved Top Priorities Animal health Pharmaceuticals Rural veterinary care Small business issues Student debt Veterinary workforce Education & Career Education/Career - Column 1 Veterinary studentTools to help you transition to your new veterinary career New veterinarianAnswers to the questions you're facing as you start out in your professional life Rising professionalEarly-career resources to continue your professional and personal growth Accreditation & certification AVMA Center for Veterinary Education Accreditation Foreign veterinary graduates (ECFVG) Veterinary specialties Education Accredited veterinary colleges Internships & externships Veterinary faculty resources K-12 educator resources AVMA COE upcoming site visits Continuing education (CE) CE overview Digital education (AVMA Axon) AVMA Convention Leadership development Leadership development overview Veterinary Leadership Conference Awards Jobs Veterinary Career Center Search jobs Post a job Career development webinars International opportunities Veterinary salary estimator Resources & Tools Resources & Tools Column 1 AVMA policiesProfessional policy guidance, open for member input multiple-users-1Diversity, equity, and inclusionCreating socially conscious work environments WellbeingSelf-care and workplace wellbeing for the whole veterinary team Practice managementProfitability and finance, marketing, leadership, and team building Personal financesLoans, budgets, financial planning, and more One HealthInterprofessional collaboration across animal, human, and environmental health Animal health & welfareDisease and pain management, behavior, disaster preparedness, humane endings, and more Journals & research AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Veterinary Clinical Trials Registry Veterinary economics Reports & statistics Public resources Pet owners K-12 educators Events Featured events AVMA ConventionGet best-in-class CE in some of your favorite cities. There’s no better place to network, learn, and meet up with the friends and colleagues who make veterinary medicine so rewarding. Veterinary Leadership ConferenceThe Veterinary Leadership Conference draws veterinarians from across the U.S. for education sessions that help develop leaders for the veterinary profession. Calendar of events Future meeting dates Awareness events Featured events DEIW SummitNovember 7-9 Animal Welfare Assessment ContestNovember 22-24 News Featured news AVMA@Work blogStay current on important veterinary news, AVMA activities, and member services. AVMA NewsRead the latest news about the AVMA and the veterinary profession, and search archives dating back to 2000. NewslettersGet the latest updates on your choice of veterinary topics delivered straight to your inbox. Recalls & alertsKeep track of product alerts for pet foods, animal feed, and products used by veterinarians or animal owners. Publications AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Reports Newsletters Media relations Press releases Leadership bios Media guide Media contacts Follow us AVMA on social media Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram YouTube Podcasts RSS About AVMA Information We are AVMA Vision, mission & values History AVMA staff leadership Strategic planning Partnerships Annual report Awards Careers at AVMA AVMA Family American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) Organization How we work Board of Directors House Advisory Committee House of Delegates State & allied groups Bylaws Contact Contact us Media contacts Membership Directories Member directory Volunteer leaders AVMA staff leaders Membership information AVMA membership Renew your membership Join AVMA Membership FAQs New member resource center Sign in Get involved Volunteer opportunities AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Donate to American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) Communities AVMA on social media Student AVMA (SAVMA) Allied groups International VMAs Advocacy Advocacy areas Advocacy International affairs Take action Stay informed AVMA Congressional Advocacy Network (CAN) AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Get involved Top priorities Animal health Pharmaceuticals Rural veterinary care Small business issues Student debt Veterinary workforce Education & Career Career stages Veterinary student New veterinarian Rising professional Accreditation & certification AVMA Center for Veterinary Education Accreditation Foreign veterinary graduates (ECFVG) Veterinary specialties Education Accredited veterinary colleges Internships & externships Veterinary faculty resources K-12 educator resources AVMA COE upcoming site visits Continuing education (CE) CE overview Digital education (AVMA Axon) AVMA Convention Leadership development Leadership development overview Veterinary Leadership Conference Awards Jobs Veterinary Career Center Search jobs Post a job Career development webinars International opportunities Veterinary salary estimator Resources & Tools AVMA Policies Search Resources Resource categories AVMA policies Diversity, equity, and inclusion Wellbeing Practice management Personal finances One Health Animal health & welfare Journals & research AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Veterinary Clinical Trials Registry Veterinary economics Reports & statistics Public resources Pet owners K-12 educators Events AVMA events AVMA Convention Veterinary Leadership Conference Calendar of events Future meeting dates Awareness events Featured events DEIW Summit Animal Welfare Assessment Contest News Featured AVMA@Work blog AVMA News Newsletters Recalls & alerts Publications AVMA journals Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association (JAVMA) American Journal of Veterinary Research (AJVR) Reports Newsletters Media relations Press releases Leadership bios Media guide Media contacts Follow us AVMA on social media Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram YouTube Podcasts RSS About AVMA information We are AVMA Vision, mission & values History AVMA staff leadership Strategic planning Partnerships Annual report Awards Careers at AVMA AVMA family American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) Organization How we work Board of Directors House Advisory Committee House of Delegates State & allied groups Bylaws Contact Contact us Media contacts Join/Renew Insurance Store Careers Site search Breadcrumb Home AVMA News Emergency aid available for HPAI-related milk losses Emergency aid available for HPAI-related milk losses July 15, 2024 Dairy producers who have sustained milk losses among their herds due to highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), specifically avian influenza virus type A (H5N1), can now apply for emergency financial assistance as of July 1. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has begun accepting applications through its updated Emergency Assistance for Livestock, Honeybees, and Farm-raised Fish Program (ELAP). As of July 11, H5N1 had been confirmed in dairy cattle in 12 states: 27 herds each in Colorado and Idaho, 25 in Michigan, 21 in Texas, 13 in Iowa, eight in New Mexico, seven in Minnesota, five in South Dakota, four in Kansas, and one each in North Carolina, Ohio, and Wyoming. Federal funding for indemnity payments is now available to dairy farmers who have sustained milk losses due to an H5N1 outbreak affecting dairy cattle in a dozen states. “When something unexpected, like H5N1, threatens the economic viability of the producers we serve, we are committed to finding ways, where we have the authority to do so, to revisit existing program policies and provide the financial support needed to help producers recover and sustain production,” Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack said in a June 27 press release. The USDA’s Farm Service Agency (FSA) expanded ELAP to assist with a portion of financial losses resulting from reduced milk production when cattle are removed from commercial milking in dairy herds having a confirmed positive H5N1 test. Positive test results must be confirmed through the USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service’s (APHIS) National Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL). Other requirements mandate that eligible adult dairy cattle must be: Part of a herd that has a confirmed positive H5N1 test from NVSL. Initially removed from commercial milk production at some point during the 14-day period before the sample collection date for the positive H5N1 test date through 120 days after the sample collection date for the positive H5N1 test. Milk-producing, currently lactating. Maintained for commercial milk production, in which the producer has a financial risk, on the beginning date of the eligible loss condition. To apply, producers need to submit the following to FSA: Proof of herd infection through a confirmed positive H5N1 test, based on USDA’s APHIS H5N1 case definition, on individual animal or bulk tank samples confirmed by NVSL. A notice of loss indicating the date when the loss is apparent, which is the sample collection date for the positive H5N1 test. An application for payment certifying the number of eligible adult dairy cows, the month the cows were removed from production, and the producer’s share in the milk production. The final date to file a notice of loss and application for payment for eligible losses is 30 days after the end of the prior calendar year, which is January 30, 2025. Details on the updated ELAP policy to provide financial assistance for milk loss due H5N1 were published in the Federal Register on July 1. ELAP already provides emergency relief to eligible producers of livestock, honeybees, and farm-raised fish to assist with losses resulting from disease, adverse weather, or other conditions, such as wildfires, that are not covered by other FSA disaster assistance programs. The American Association of Bovine Practitioners (AABP) has estimated the economic impact of H5N1 for dairy cattle to be $100 to $200 per cow. Dr. Fred Gingrich, AABP executive director, previously told AVMA News that one of the barriers to reporting and disclosure from dairy producers is because there was no incentive to report. The hope is that federal funding for indemnity payments will help overcome that barrier and help researchers and federal officials better understand the disease, control it’s spread, figure out the epidemiology, and understand the long- and short-term impacts to not only the dairy industry, but also the entire agriculture sector and human health. Dairy producers in all states are reminded to stay vigilant and follow established APHIS biosecurity, detection, and testing guidelines. In addition to testing, enhanced biosecurity is critical to containing this virus. The USDA works closely with state animal health officials, producers, and industry organizations to provide guidance and resources for cleaning and disinfection, not only on affected farms, but also for all livestock producers as part of practicing good biosecurity. APHIS has made biosecurity documents available on its landing page. Bovine Production medicine National legislation & regulation Practice management Business & economic issues Public health Related content Delegates updated on HPAI response $200M from federal government aims to stop spread of H5N1 among dairy cows Diligent detective work leads to discovery of HPAI in dairy cattle Footer: AVMA Family The AVMA Family American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) AVMA LIFE AVMA PLIT AVMA Political Action Committee (PAC) Student AVMA (SAVMA) Footer menu Contact us Work at AVMA Privacy policy Terms of use Sitemap Social Media Follow Us Subscribe to Newsletters © 2024 American Veterinary Medical Association All rights reservedAustralia is aiming to eradicate bird flu. This is how scientists are tracking and tracing the outbreak - ABC NewsSkip to main contentABC NewsJust InFor YouPoliticsUS ElectionWorldBusinessAnalysisSportLifestyleEntertainmentMoreSearch the news, stories & peopleLog inNews HomeJust InFor YouAnalysisRuralWatch LiveHealthIndigenousPoliticsUS ElectionScienceElectionsWorldEnvironmentInvestigationsBusinessFact CheckLocal newsSportAFLNRLFootballTennisCricketNetballLifestyleWellbeingRelationships & FamilyFood & RecipesPersonal FinanceHome & GardenEntertainmentTV & MoviesBooksMusicPop CultureArtsYour ABC AccountPersonalise the news andstay in the knowLog in to personaliseFacebookYouTubeInstagramTwitterEmergencyBackstoryNewsletters中文新闻BERITA BAHASA INDONESIATOK PISINABCABC iViewABC ListenTriple JABC KidsABC NewsABC News News HomeAustralia is aiming to eradicate bird flu. This is how scientists are tracking and tracing the outbreakShare Australia is aiming to eradicate bird flu. This is how scientists are tracking and tracing the outbreakBy Tom Hartley7.30Topic:Public HealthTue 16 JulTuesday 16 JulyTue 16 Jul 2024 at 7:32amLoading...In short:Eleven farms have been infected with avian influenza so far across New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT. Testing has revealed three different strains appeared at roughly the same time.What's next?Funds have been set aside to investigate the potential for commercial avian influenza vaccines for farm hens and national surveillance initiatives are also a priority.abc.net.auews/bird-flu-testing-outbreak-farms-australia/104100982Link copiedShareShare articleIt's a nerve-wracking wait for answers.The biosecurity agents have been and gone.They took samples from a sick bird showing symptoms of a deadly avian disease.Will my farm and business be forced shut?Will my flock — thousands of chickens – be culled?These are the thoughts racing through farmer Greg Palethorpe's mind.Egg Farmer Greg Palethorpe found a chicken on his farm showing symptoms of the deadly bird flu HPAI. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)"It makes you feel really poor," Mr Palethorpe told 7.30.Greg's business – Farmer Brown's Free Range Eggs – is on the outskirts of Canberra, seven kilometres from a confirmed outbreak site, and within a tightly controlled quarantine zone."It's a trying time when you know there's potential for such a disease — that can cause such devastation to your hens and your business — potentially floating around."The hen he found was lethargic, with red eyes and a swollen comb.If it tests positive, the whole flock receives the same treatment.Greg's farm is now within a tightly controlled quarantine zone. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)"We'd have to cull all the hens on site, and then they'd either be buried or burnt here," he said."That would be a heartbreaking thing to happen."Among the strict protocols on Greg's farm, there's a 'hot zone' and a 'cold zone' on his property, restricting the free movement of people, poultry, eggs, and machinery.Tracking and tracing the outbreaksThe samples from Greg's farm are sent to Menangle, a semi-rural suburb on Sydney's city limit.It's here on a sprawling 1,600-hectare property where scientists are tracking and tracing the outbreak in a busy biosecure virology lab.Veterinary virologist Dr Andrew Read. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)"We've had a big upturn in the number of samples coming in for avian influenza testing," veterinary virologist Dr Andrew Read told 7.30."We've done over 1,400 tests, a lot of those are pools, with five birds per sample."More than 1,400 samples have been received at the Elizabeth Macarthur Agricultural Institute. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)Dr Read is one of the chief scientists involved in surveillance for the state of New South Wales and the ACT, at the Elizabeth Macarthur Agricultural Institute."For chickens, [the virus] is really contagious," Dr Read said, explaining the importance of surveillance testing."They're shedding billions of copies of the virus at the peak."They'll sneeze, make these little droplets, if they're the right size, then they'll continue floating in the wind."It can potentially spread on the wind up to a kilometre or so, if the conditions are right."High-risk samples are marked in red. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)In his ice-white lab, specimen tubes are received twice a day.They're triaged according to threat, with high-risk cases marked red."We are able to show birds are actively shedding the virus by the amount of virus [the samples] had in them," Dr Read said.The procedure is likened to PCR testing used to track and trace COVID-19, and the science is so specific they're able to detect the exact genetics of each virus and predict their origins.At this stage, in Australia, there's no sign of the H5N1 strain that's causing widespread deaths in birds and mammals overseas.But further examination has revealed our country is in an unprecedented situation.What makes this outbreak unprecedented?Australia must go two months without a single case before it can be declared free of avian flu. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)The CSIRO's Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP) has been conducting genetic sequencing on samples from all outbreak sites in NSW, ACT and Victoria.Eleven farms have been infected, with more than 1.8 million poultry birds euthanised.Testing has revealed three different strains appeared at roughly the same time between May and June. The ACDP confirmed to 7.30 this is an Australian first.All belong to the 'H7' family of viruses, which has been responsible for every poultry outbreak in Australia's history."By comparing the viruses' genetic code, we can see the three strains causing the three outbreaks are not closely related but are more closely related to low pathogenic strains known to be carried by Australian wild birds," The ACDP's Dr Frank Wong told 7.30."This leads us to believe each outbreak is likely to have spilled over from wild birds, probably waterfowl and ducks, separately," he said.Australia's Chief Veterinarian Dr Beth Cookson said many avian influenza viruses have the potential to infect other animals including humans."However, the majority of that occurs during very close contact with sick birds or their environments," she told 7.30."Currently the circulating strains are considered low-risk to other animals, including humans."Still, the timing of the outbreaks remains somewhat of a mystery.There is one theory that proposes with more free range areas the virus could have become more prominent. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)"What's surprising is they've all happened at the same time," Dr Andrew Read told 7.30, offering a theory."There may be increased interaction between wild birds and chickens these days … there's more free range."It's a different scenario to what it was 40 or 50 years ago, where all the chickens were in sheds."Mutating deathThere are two types of Avian Influenzas: low pathogenic (LPAI) and high pathogenic (HPAI).The low pathogen version is carried and spread in wild duck populations."But once those chickens get infected, there's a mutation that happens, and turns into this high path avian influenza, which causes all the disease, causing chickens to die," Dr Read explained."It's a respiratory disease, but also a gastrointestinal disease."Loading...The virus kills chickens by rapidly replicating itself, destroying the hosts' cells, causing a severe immune response, which leads to critical organ failure."They'll shed the virus by sneezing and coughing, but they shed a lot in their faeces as well," Dr Read said."So you can have thousands of chickens die overnight, just suddenly, seemingly without any symptoms."What's next?After a short but agonising wait, farmer Greg got the results back for the sick chicken found on his Canberra farm."They were negative, so that means no bird flu, which was a great relief for me," he told 7.30."But every day we get on the farm, thinking, 'what are we going to see'?"Scientists say there's no doubt another strain will pop up; they just can't say which one, where, or when.Much like humans, birds' immunity changes over time, meaning different virus strains will appear and dominate in the coming years.Among the strict protocols on Greg's farm, there’s a 'hot zone' and a 'cold zone' on his property, restricting the free movement of people, poultry, eggs, and machinery. (ABC News: Richard Mockler)"For example, it seems H7 viruses are predominant this year, but next year it could be H3 or H10 viruses as the birds develop immunity," Dr Andrew Read said.'Unprecedented trail of destruction'Photo shows Rows of dead birds including skuas and penguins. A deadly strain of avian influenza has breached the world's most remote continent. Scientists say it's only a matter of time before it reaches Australia. Dr Cookson said government departments, scientists, ecologists, and other experts are working together to understand future risks."Bird owners, no matter whether it's backyard poultry or bigger commercial poultry, can take this opportunity to make sure they've got good biosecurity in place," she said.Funds have been set aside to investigate the potential of commercial avian influenza vaccines for farm hens, part of a $7 million package from the federal government that also includes millions for national surveillance initiatives.Then there's the other looming threat – a potential outbreak of H5N1, the bird flu strain that's caused a global animal pandemic – including the death of thousands of penguins in Antarctica."The arrival of migratory birds from areas where H5 HPAI is present – particularly as spring approaches – means we face a constant risk that is outside of our control," Agriculture Minister Murray Watt said."We can't stop the natural migration patterns of wild birds that may be sick, but we can prepare ourselves if that does occur."Watch 7.30, Mondays to Thursdays 7:30pm on ABC iview and ABC TVContact 7.30Do you know more about this story? Get in touch with 7.30 here.Posted Tue 16 Jul 2024 at 7:32amTuesday 16 Jul 2024 at 7:32amTue 16 Jul 2024 at 7:32am, updated Tue 16 Jul 2024 at 12:30pmTuesday 16 Jul 2024 at 12:30pmTue 16 Jul 2024 at 12:30pmShare optionsCopy linkFacebookX (formerly Twitter)Top StoriesFamily shares tribute for Eleanor Bryant, teacher's aide killed when truck crashed into preschoolTopic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Early election speculation reaches a fever pitch as Albanese announces two candidates in two hoursTopic:ElectionsPhoto shows A man in a black suit and a yellow tie stands at a podium, addressing the press and gesturing to the crowd.Donald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorPhoto shows SuperannuationUnder proposed laws the truth about COVID-19 could have been struck from the internetTopic:Social MediaPhoto shows A row of people looking at their phones with one set of hands and phone in focus. Police had warnings about Bondi Junction killer's behaviour before mass stabbing, court toldTopic:CrimePhoto shows Bondi Junction Stabbing RampageRelated storiesOn the planet's most remote continent, a deadly virus is leaving a 'trail of destruction' that has scientists on edgeTopic:Avian InfluenzaPhoto shows Rows of dead birds including skuas and penguins. Experts warn Australia not investing enough to prepare for 'catastrophic' affects of H5 bird flu variantTopic:Avian InfluenzaPhoto shows Caged hen at Werribee in VictoriaBird flu strain behind global animal pandemic closes in on Australian shoresTopic:Avian InfluenzaPhoto shows two people in personal protection suits examine a a dead animal on a beach Related topicsAnimal ScienceBiotechnology (Science and Technology)Disease OutbreakPublic HealthSydneyTop StoriesFamily shares tribute for Eleanor Bryant, teacher's aide killed when truck crashed into preschoolTopic:Road Accidents and IncidentsPhoto shows Eleanor Bryant, who was killed when a truck crashed into a Victorian preschool, pictured smiling at the races.Early election speculation reaches a fever pitch as Albanese announces two candidates in two hoursTopic:ElectionsDonald Trump and the one big threat to Australia's almost $4 trillion superannuation systemDAnalysis by David TaylorUnder proposed laws the truth about COVID-19 could have been struck from the internetTopic:Social MediaPolice had warnings about Bondi Junction killer's behaviour before mass stabbing, court toldTopic:CrimeJust InScrap metal pile next to a back road reveals ghosts of lithium past, present and futureTopic:Mining and Metals Industry2m ago2 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 6:10amThe elusive, smelly 'corpse flower' is delighting crowds in once-in-a-decade bloomTopic:Botanical Gardens6m ago6 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 6:06amJohn ran 100km after just three months of training, with a community supporting him throughTopic:Mental Health20m ago20 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 5:52amAustralian aviation pioneer Lawrence Hargrave celebrated 130 years after first heavier-than-air flightTopic:Aerospace and Defence Equipment Manufacturing14m ago14 minutes agoTue 12 Nov 2024 at 5:58amMore Just InBack to topFooterABC News homepageMore From ABC NEWSWe acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn, and work.SectionsABC NEWSJust InWatch LivePoliticsWorldBusinessAnalysisSportScienceHealthEntertainmentLifestyleFact CheckOtherNews in language中文Berita Bahasa IndonesiaTok PisinConnect with ABC NewsFacebookInstagramYouTubeApple NewsX (formerly Twitter)More from ABC NewsContact ABC NEWSThis service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced.AEST = Australian Eastern Standard Time which is 10 hours ahead of GMT (Greenwich Mean Time)Editorial PoliciesAccessibilityHelpContact UsAbout the ABCPrivacy PolicyTerms of Use© 2024 ABCH5N1 news, bird flu Colorado outbreak, new bubonic plague case and why COVID is rising again | American Medical Association Skip to main content Explore AMA Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Delivering Care Delivering Care Coronavirus AMA Guides® Health Equity Public Health Physician-Patient Relationship Overdose Epidemic Hypertension Diabetes Population Care Precision Medicine Ethics Health equity in organized medicine survey reports The Health Equity in Organized Medicine (HEIOM) survey collects data on efforts by stateerritorial and specialty medical associations to advance health equity. Hurricane recovery in Florida, the IV fluid shortage and health care emergency preparedness The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about health care emergency preparedness. Practice Management Practice Management AMA STEPS Forward® AMA Store Practice Transformation CPT® Prior Authorization Reducing Administrative Burden Scope of Practice Sustainability Physician Health Claims Processing Private Practices Payment & Delivery Models Medicare & Medicaid Digital HIPAA Career Development Pearl of the Week: Reduce the documentation burden Find resources on outpatient documentation and coding. CPT errata & technical corrections Download PDFs to see the latest corrections to the published AMA CPT code books. Education Education AMA PRA Credit System Improve GME GME Funding Medical School Diversity ChangeMedEd Initiative International Medical Education Challenges with Matching for international medical graduates and how IMGs help residency programs The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about the Match rate for IMGs and more. Challenges with Matching for international medical graduates and how IMGs help residency programs [Podcast] The AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians and patients. Learn more about the Match rate for IMGs and more. Medical Students Medical Students Preparing for Medical School USMLE® Step 1 & 2 Medical School Life Medical Student Health Medical Student Finance Clinical Rotations Publishing Research Medical Student Advocacy Specialty Profiles Preparing for Residency AMA members can now save up to $80 off UWorld QBanks USMLE Steps 1–3, COMLEX Levels 1–2, ABIM and ABFM board exam prep are part of the special offer that ends Nov. 30. Learn more. What it's like in allergy and immunology: Shadowing Dr. Fraser AMA member Burcin Fraser, MD, of Privia Health, says that—depending on the setting— the work-life balance in allergy and immunology can be a big draw. Medical Residents Medical Residents Residency Life Research During Residency Medical Fellowships Medical Resident Wellness Medical Resident Advocacy Medical Residency Personal Finance USMLE® Step 3 Transition from Resident to Attending Holidays at the hospital during GME—6 tips to make the most of it Resident physicians often spend end-of-year holidays away from home, but interactions with peers and patients offer opportunities to find merriment. It matters how your practice is paid. A primer for young doctors. You need a job, and there are many different payment models prevalent. Learn which can work best for you. Health Care Advocacy Health Care Advocacy Advocating for Public Health Access to Care Administrative Burdens Payment Reform Advocacy Update Federal Advocacy State Advocacy Judicial Advocacy AMA advocacy efforts The AMA advocates at the federal and state levels on key health care issues impacting patients and physicians. Download the PDF updates of the AMA's impact. AMA advocacy events Collaborating and networking to advocate for patients and the medical profession. Member Benefits Member Benefits Personal Member Benefits & Discounts Practice Benefits & Discounts Member Eligibility & Dues Events CME Opportunities ChangeMedEd® 2025 ChangeMedEd® is a national conference that brings together leaders and innovators to accelerate change in medical education across the continuum. Learn more. Learning Collaborative: Augmented Intelligence (AI) Governance Build a framework for the implementation of AI in practice during this seven-month shared learning collaborative launching April 2025. Organization Board of Trustees House of Delegates House of Delegates HOD Organization AMA Policies Annual Meeting Interim Meeting AMA Elections Business of the AMA House of Delegates Interim Meeting Download PDFs and access information submitted for consideration at the AMA House of Delegates Interim Meeting. Highlights from the 2024 AMA Interim Meeting Track the news and key moments from the AMA House of Delegates’ meeting, which runs Nov. 8–12. Councils Councils Council on Constitution & Bylaws Council on Ethical & Judicial Affairs Council on Legislation Council on Long Range Planning & Development Council on Medical Education Council on Medical Service Council on Science & Public Health Medical education leadership opportunities Apply for a leadership position by submitting the required documentation by the deadline. General medical education: Council on Medical Education reports & issue briefs Download PDFs of reports on this topic from the Council on Medical Education presented during the AMA Interim and Annual Meetings. Member Groups (Sections) Member Groups (Sections) Section Meetings Academic Physicians LGBTQ+ Section Integrated Physician Practices International Medical Graduates Medical Students Minority Affairs Organized Medical Staff Private Practice Physicians Residents & Fellows Senior Physicians Women Physicians Young Physicians 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting highlights Read highlights from the 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting. 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting agenda & resources Find the agenda PDF, documents and more for the 2024 IMGS Interim Meeting on Nov. 8 at the Walt Disney World Swan and Dolphin Resort, Orlando, Florida. About About AMA Center for Health Equity Board of Trustees Leadership Foundation Office of International Relations CPT® Editorial Panel RVS Update Committee (RUC) United States Adopted Names Publications & Newsletters Research AMA History Awards AMA Career Opportunities Physician Professional Data™ CPT® Editorial Panel Meeting Process Calendar Find a calendar listing the upcoming meetings of the CPT Editorial Panel. RVS Update Committee (RUC) Understand the role the AMA/Specialty Society RUC plays in providing physicians a voice in shaping Medicare relative values. Explore Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Join Renew Join / Renew Popular SearchesMedicare reformFree CME for membersBurnout by specialtyDEA training requirementJoy in Medicine program Member Benefits Sign In Sign In To Enjoy Your AMA Benefits Sign In Become a Member Create Free Account My Subscriptions My Topics My Bookmarks Public Health H5N1 news, bird flu Colorado outbreak, new bubonic plague case and why COVID is rising again Jul 17, 2024 . 11 MIN READ Subscribe AMA Update Member Benefits Print Page Share Share via Email Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Doximity Copy Add Bookmark AMA Update covers a range of health care topics affecting the lives of physicians, residents, medical students and patients. From private practice and health system leaders to scientists and public health officials, hear from the experts in medicine on COVID-19, medical education, advocacy issues, burnout, vaccines and more. Featured topic and speakers Featured topic and speakers Is bird flu still a danger? What does avian flu do to humans? Are there still cases of bubonic plague? Is bubonic plague curable? Where is COVID surging? Our guest is the American Medical Association's Vice President of Science, Medicine and Public Health, Andrea Garcia, JD, MPH. AMA Chief Experience Officer Todd Unger hosts. The AMA is your powerful ally in patient care. Join now. Looking for a COVID map? Get the latest CDC COVID Tracker map, charts and data. Searching for "COVID vaccine near me"? Find vaccines in your area. Googling "COVID testing near me"? Find where to get COVID test kits. Wondering how long are COVID tests are good for or do expired COVID tests work? Check FDA COVID test expiration date extensions. COVID Wastewater data via CDC National Wastewater Surveillance System (NWSS). CDC current avian flu map. For bird flu news visit Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC H5N1 Bird Flu Current Situation Summary (CDC H5N1 technical report). If the CDC issues new health warning, get the latest CDC health alert 2024 via the Health Alert Network (HAN CDC website). Speaker Andrea Garcia, JD, MPH, vice president, science, medicine & public health, American Medical Association Advancing public health AMA membership offers unique access to savings and resources tailored to enrich the personal and professional lives of physicians, residents and medical students. Learn More Transcript Transcript Unger: Hello and welcome to the AMA Update video and podcast. Today we have our weekly look at the headlines with the AMA's Vice President of Science, Medicine and Public Health, Andrea Garcia. I'm Todd Unger, AMA's chief experience officer. Andrea, good to see you. Garcia: Good to see you, too. Thanks for having me back. Unger: Well, the big news this week is more human cases of bird flu. Andrea, tell us what's going on. Garcia: Yeah, Todd. So that number of human cases has increased over the weekend. It was three new cases. On Monday, that number grew to four. And now at the time of this filming, five additional cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza or H5 bird flu virus infections have been identified, all of them in Colorado. The cases were identified by the Colorado Department of Public Health. And so far, four of them have undergone confirmatory testing by the CDC. All five of those cases occurred in workers on the same poultry farm in northeastern Colorado. Dairy cattle was not the source of spread, like it was in previous cases we've seen. As a reminder, though, prior to this announcement, we had seen four human cases related to this outbreak—two in Michigan, one in Colorado, one in Texas. Now, this brings the total to nine human cases of bird flu in the U.S., more than doubling the number of people infected in just a few days' time. Unger: So Andrea, that's a big change once you have bird flu actually transmitted by birds to humans here. Is the virus becoming more adaptable? What's changing? Garcia: Well, research is ongoing to determine how the virus is evolving. However, these workers are believed to have been exposed to the virus through direct contact with infected birds. All nine cases reported this year have been mild, consisting of conjunctivitis and/or a runny nose and other mild respiratory symptoms. The numbers really, though, remain too low to say anything for certain about the disease. We know that flu symptoms can range from mild to severe. And they vary from person to person. So although these case numbers are low, the number of people who have gotten the virus from poultry or cattle could actually be much higher. We know that only about 60 people have been tested for novel influenza A over the past four months. So testing hasn't exactly been widespread. And some workers, of course, may not have reported symptoms, either because they weren't comfortable doing so or the symptoms were so mild that they didn't even think it was worth mentioning. To get a better grasp of the extent of this outbreak to understand whether cases are going undetected, some researchers in Michigan have sent the CDC blood samples from workers on dairy farms. And if bird flu antibodies are detected, people may be more easily infected by cattle than previously believed. So we'll have to wait and see to learn more. Unger: Well, Andrea, given the changes that we've been talking about, in the meantime, is the CDC changing their risk assessment based on these new cases? Garcia: No, they're not. The CDC still says that that risk to the general public is low because each of these cases that we've seen so far, the workers were directly exposed to an infected animal. In a statement that was posted in response to these new Colorado cases, the CDC said that an assessment of these cases will help inform whether the situation warrants a change to that human health risk assessment. There is a CDC team in Colorado on the ground supporting this assessment of the poultry outbreak and associated human cases. Unger: Now, Andrea, you mentioned cattle up front as well. Have the cases among cattle continued to spread? Garcia: They have. And earlier this week, we added a 13th state to the list of those that have infected dairy herds. That's Oklahoma. The disease has now been detected in more than 150 dairy herds nationwide. However, the samples sent in from the Oklahoma dairy farm date back to April. And the dairy sent them to USDA for testing after the farm learned that it could receive financial assistance for lost milk production from bird flu. So as we've talked about before, the USDA has launched a program to compensate farmers with sick cows for 90% of lost milk production per cow. And that's as a way to encourage farmers to test herds and report infection. We have seen some public health officials pitch another tactic to persuade resistant dairy farmers. And that's anonymized testing. So in that scenario, results from individual farms would be anonymized and sent to the USDA. And that would offer a snapshot about disease spread and how the virus is mutating. There are, of course, drawbacks to this approach. And I think one of those is that we wouldn't be able to address transmission at the source. Unger: Well, we'll certainly keep an eye on that as we get more data. Unfortunately, Colorado made the news for another reason this week. It reported a case of bubonic plague. We've talked about this once before, Andrea. But I know to a lot of people, this doesn't sound real. Andrea, what can you tell us about the disease and if we need to be concerned? Garcia: So you mentioned, Todd, we have talked about this before. Bubonic plague is a bacterial infection. It was historically very deadly, but is now far more treatable with the help of antibiotics. It earned its reputation as Black Death back in the 14th century. It had a devastating effect, wiping out tens of millions of people in Europe. However, according to the CDC today, we only see about seven human cases a year in the U.S., with most of those occurring in the West, especially in northern New Mexico and in Arizona. According to the WHO, human-to-human transmission of bubonic plague is now very rare. The reason that this is making news right now is that case that you mentioned in Colorado, which was just confirmed a few days ago. Unger: So Andrea, if human-to-human transmission is rare, how are these folks getting it? Garcia: Well, the plague is caused by a zoonotic bacteria known as Yersinia pestis. It's transmitted by fleas. And it cycles naturally among wild rodents. So it can infect both humans and their pets. People get plague from the bites of infected fleas, by touching infected animals, or by inhaling droplets from the cough of an infected person or animal. In February of this year, there was a case of human plague that was confirmed in rural Oregon. That patient was thought to have been infected by their pet cat that was showing symptoms. Even though the disease is now rare, it is important to get tested and treated immediately if you develop symptoms. And that's because plague can progress quickly and can cause serious complications or even become deadly. Unger: So Andrea, what symptoms do people need to watch out for? Garcia: Well, painful swollen lymph nodes or buboes are the telltale symptom. The bacteria typically multiply in a lymph node close to where the flea bite occurred and then can spread in the bloodstream if untreated. Other symptoms to watch for are sudden fever and chills, severe headaches, muscle aches, nausea and vomiting. These symptoms generally develop after an incubation period of about one to seven days. Again, plague is very rare. There's no cause for concern. Overall, our improved sanitation, better living conditions and effective antibiotic treatments have helped keep this disease under control. People can, of course, reduce their chance of contracting the disease by eliminating places where rodents can hide and breed around your home, your garage, your shed or recreational area. And then treat your dogs or cats for fleas regularly. Unger: Well, that's good to know. Andrea, our last topic today is something that, unfortunately, has become far more wide spread of late. And that is COVID. Andrea, what can you tell us right now about what's happening? Garcia: Well, you may be hearing about more people around you getting COVID. And that's because the numbers are steadily increasing. There was a CBS News article and CDC figures published last Friday indicating that more than half of states are now seeing high or very high levels of COVID. Based on their wastewater testing on a national level, the CDC says that the overall level of COVID in wastewater is high. And that is for the first time since this past winter. Friday's update was the first that we've seen in about a month because of the Fourth of July holiday. So there was a delay in the data. According to the CDC, DC and 26 states are now seeing substantial increases in COVID emergency room visits nationwide. The average share of ED patients with COVID is the highest that it's been since February. It's increased 115% from a month ago. Unger: Andrea, put this in perspective for us. Is this worse than we've seen in previous summers? Garcia: No, it's not worse. And there was a deputy director from the CDC who said that what we are seeing, these patterns—they're consistent with what we've observed over the last couple of years in the summer, where we've seen upticks in activity that have occurred around this time of year that are not quite as large as what we see during the winter peaks. In previous years, cases have peaked around July or August. So while this steady increase is not surprising, I think it is a good reminder that there are precautions we can take to protect ourselves and those around us. If you test positive, stay home. Many people will be able to treat their symptoms with over-the-counter medications. But for those who are more likely to develop severe disease, prescription medications, such as Paxlovid and remdesivir, are available. Those do need to be started within about five days of symptom onset to be effective. So it is smart to contact your physician as soon as you know that you are sick. Unger: Well, thank you for that update. And that's all we have time for this week. Andrea, thanks for being here and sharing all your perspective and information. For those of you out here listening, if you found the discussion valuable, you can support more programming like it by becoming an AMA member at ama-assn.org/join. And as always, you can find our videos and podcasts at ama-assn.org/podcasts. Thanks for joining us today. Please take care. Disclaimer: The viewpoints expressed in this video are those of the participants and/or do not necessarily reflect the views and policies of the AMA. Subscribe to AMA Update Get videos with expert opinions from the AMA on the most important health care topics affecting physicians, residents, medical students and patients—delivered to your inbox. Subscribe Now Table of Contents Featured topic and speakers Transcript Table of Contents Featured topic and speakers Transcript Upvote 1 Bird Flu Coronavirus (COVID-19) AMA Update Catalog of Topics FEATURED STORIES Nov 4, 2024 · 4 MIN READ Building consensus to fix prior auth at the state level Oct 31, 2024 · 5 MIN READ Time to crack down on ERISA plans’ use of prior authorization Oct 30, 2024 · 5 MIN READ 5 ways to optimize the patient portal and cut physician burdens Nov 4, 2024 · 6 MIN READ To attract new physicians, listen to the ones already on board Also of Interest: 2024 Dengue Fever Outbreak, Dengue Symptoms, A... Is COVID on the rise again? The latest COVID...Bird flu 2024: H5N1 virus news, recent measles... The AMA promotes the art and science of medicine and the betterment of public health. AMA Contact Us Download AMA Connect app for iPhone or Android AMA Careers Events Press Center AMA Alliance AMPAC AMA Foundation The best in medicine, delivered to your mailbox Please enter your email address. I verify that I’m in the U.S. and agree to receive communication from the AMA or third parties on behalf of AMA. Explore AMA Products JAMA Network™ FREIDA™ CME from AMA Ed Hub™ GCEP AMA Journal of Ethics® CPT Store AMA Physician Profiles AMA Insurance Terms of Use Privacy Policy Code of Conduct Website Accessibility Copyright 1995 - 2024 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.Bird flu infects workers at Colorado poultry farm - Los Angeles Times News Home Page California Election 2024 Housing & Homelessness Politics Science & Medicine World & Nation Business Artificial Intelligence Autos Jobs, Labor & Workplace Real Estate Technology and the Internet California California Politics Earthquakes Education Housing & Homelessness L.A. Influential L.A. Politics Mental Health Climate & Environment Global Warming Water & Drought Entertainment & Arts Arts Books Stand-Up Comedy Hollywood Inc. The Envelope (Awards) Movies Music Television Things to Do De Los En Español Food 101 best restaurants in L.A. Recipes Image Lifestyle Health & Wellness Home Design L.A. Affairs Plants Travel & Experiences Weekend Things to Do in L.A. Obituaries Opinion Editorials Letters to the Editor Op-Ed Short Docs Sports Angels Angel City FC Chargers Clippers Dodgers Ducks Galaxy High School Sports Kings Lakers Olympics USC UCLA Rams Sparks World & Nation Immigration & the Border Israel-Hamas Mexico & the Americas Ukraine Times Everywhere 404 by L.A. Times Facebook Instagram LA Times Today Newsletters Photography Podcasts Short Docs TikTok Threads Video YouTube X (Twitter) For Subscribers All Sections _________________ eNewspaper About Us About Us Archives Company News eNewspaper For the Record Got a Tip? L.A. Times Careers L.A. Times Store L.A. Times Studios News App: Apple IOS News App: Google Play Newsroom Directory Public Affairs Rights, Clearance & Permissions Short Docs Advertising Place an Ad Classifieds Coupons People on the Move Find/Post Jobs Local Ads Marketplace Media Kit: Why the L.A. Times? Hot Property Sections Place an Open House Sotheby’s International Realty Bestcovery Compare B2B Publishing Escapes. Travel. Adventure. Hot Property Crossword & Games L.A. Times Events L.A. Times Store Subscriptions Manage Subscription EZPAY Delivery Issue eNewspaper Students & Educators Subscribe Subscriber Terms Gift Subscription Terms Special Supplements Healthy Living Philanthropy Copyright © 2024, Los Angeles Times | Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | CA Notice of Collection | Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Sections Tap to enable a layout that focuses on the article. Focus mode Show Search Search Query Submit Search Bottled water bombshell Hot spider summer Entrenching coal About that monsoon View All Advertisement Climate & Environment Bird flu infections spread among workers at Colorado poultry farm A California Department of Food and Agriculture technician swabs a chicken to test for avian influenza. (Damian Dovarganes / Associated Press) By Susanne RustStaff Writer July 15, 2024 3:46 PM PT Share Share via Close extra sharing options Email Facebook X LinkedIn Threads Reddit WhatsApp Copy Link URLCopied! Print Five poultry workers at a farm in northeast Colorado have been infected by the H5N1 virus, according to Colorado’s department of public health. The workers were culling birds at a commercial poultry farm that had been affected by the virus. Their symptoms were mild, and included common “flu-like” respiratory symptoms — such as fever, chills, coughing, sore throat and runny nose — and conjunctivitis, or pink eye. None of the workers were hospitalized.The virus also has been identified in the state’s dairy cattle and wild birds. Climate & Environment Unprecedented numbers of gray whales are visiting San Francisco Bay, and nobody quite knows why Unprecedented numbers of gray whales are being spotted in San Francisco Bay, and nobody really knows why. Experts only have educated guesses about the prevalence of porpoises, dolphins and humpback whales too.July 14, 2024 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed four of the five cases. Colorado’s health department said the fifth case was presumptive, and pending confirmation. Advertisement The CDC said its risk assessment for the general public remains low, and its recommendations have not changed. “An assessment of these cases will help inform whether this situation warrants a change to the human health risk assessment,” said the agency in a statement released Monday. Climate & Environment Is bird flu in cattle here to stay? Despite assurances from the federal government that bird flu will be eradicated from dairy cows, some experts worry the disease is here to stay.June 27, 2024 These are the first cases of H5 virus infection in poultry workers since 2022. The first ever U.S. case of H5N1 in a poultry worker was reported in Colorado in April 2022. Advertisement There have also been four cases of H5 in dairy workers. One of those cases was located in Colorado.The CDC has sent a bilingual field team into the area to support the state’s investigation. The team of nine people includes epidemiologists, veterinarians, clinicians and an industrial hygienist.Public health officials say it is safe to eat properly handled and cooked poultry products. More to Read Bird flu virus found in Los Angeles County wastewater Nov. 1, 2024 There are now 90 victims in McDonald’s E. coli outbreak; lawsuits begin to roll in Oct. 31, 2024 A concerning development: H5N1 bird flu has infected a pig in Oregon, officials say Oct. 30, 2024 Climate & EnvironmentWorld & NationScience & MedicineAnimals & Pets Susanne Rust Follow Us X Instagram Email Facebook Susanne Rust is an award-winning investigative reporter specializing in environmental issues. She is based in the Bay Area. More From the Los Angeles Times World & Nation First emperor penguin known to reach Australia found on tourist beach Nov. 11, 2024 Climate & Environment ‘Drill, baby, drill!’ and climate change denial: California braces for a Trump environment Nov. 10, 2024 Climate & Environment Invasive mussels could harm California Delta ecosystem and add to water costs Nov. 6, 2024 Climate & Environment A deadly fungus that has killed millions of bats may have arrived in Southern California Oct. 31, 2024 Subscribers are Reading For Subscribers Spirit Air, cramped hotels, In-N-Out: Police say Chicago hit men killed in L.A. on a budget Trump vs. Harris preliminary results: Whom did your neighborhood vote for? What can a new President Trump really do on Day One? A guide for the worried For Subscribers At Mater Dei, a unique link to USC’s secret admission system for donors’ kids 2024 Los Angeles County elections results Advertisement Latest Climate & Environment Trump nominates former Rep. Lee Zeldin to lead the Environmental Protection Agency Nov. 11, 2024 Climate talks open in Azerbaijan with calls for a path away from the ‘road to ruin’ Nov. 11, 2024 U.S. top climate negotiator: ‘We won’t revert back’ as Trump prepares to take over Nov. 11, 2024 Controversial Prop. 65 warning labels about toxic chemicals are effective, study says Nov. 11, 2024 Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Subscribe for unlimited accessSite Map Follow Us X Instagram YouTube Facebook eNewspaper Coupons Find/Post Jobs Place an Ad Media Kit: Why the L. A. Times? Bestcovery MORE FROM THE L.A. TIMES Crossword Obituaries Recipes L.A. Times Compare L.A. Times Store Wine Club About/Contact For the Record L.A. Times Careers Manage Subscription Reprints and Permissions Site Map Copyright © 2024, Los Angeles Times | Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | CA Notice of Collection | Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information